TO THE
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 15TH TWENTY
FIVE ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION THIS
MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT A SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENTS WILL BE THE
ONLY OR TELEPHONE TO SPEAK
DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL EIGHT THREE THREE
FIVE FOUR EIGHT ZERO TO EIGHT
TO AND ENTER THE MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE SIX SIX TO FOUR AND
EIGHT FOUR FIVE EIGHT OR JOIN
VIA THE ZOOM LIKE THIS
INFORMATION IS ALSO AVAILABLE
IN THE PUBLISHED AGENDA IN THE
PUBLIC NOTICE A SECTION OF THE
CITY WEBSITE AND ON THE
BROADCAST OF THIS MEETING ON
SNEAKIN PLEASE CALL I WANT KNOW
CONTROL.
I'VE RECEIVED REQUESTS FROM
COMMISSIONERS HUTCHINSON AND
REED WILL NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND
THIS EVENING.
PLEASE STAY HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU ARE DIALING IN WHEN YOUR
NAME IS CALLED COUNCILMAN
BRACKMAN HERE ANN ARBOR
MISSIONER CARPENTER
COMMISSIONER CONAWAY HERE AND
OUR COMMISSIONER DUNLAP
COMMISSIONER FLUKING HERE AND
OUR COMMISSIONER HOW TOMOKI
THERE FROM ANN ARBOR.
>> COMMISSIONER HOAK HERE IN
FOURTH WORD ON THE WEST SIDE
OF ANN ARBOR, MISSIONER
JACOBSSON COMMISSIONER KEILLER
HEAD FROM WARD FIVE ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER LEE COMMISSIONER
ZECHER HERE IN ANN ARBOR,
COMMISSIONER MCCREEDY
COMMISSIONER MCCREEDY SORRY I
HAVE UH THERE CAN YOU HEAR ME
NOW?
OK, PERFECT.
SORRY I WAS TRYING TO JUGGLE
TWO DIFFERENT DEVICES.
I'M HERE COMMISSIONER MARGOLIS
COMMISSIONER STUKA AND I
BELIEVE THAT IS EVERYONE.
I JUST WANT TO MAKE SURE IT
LOOKS LIKE LAUREN GO AHEAD AND
PROMOTE YOU TO ANALYST
COMMISSIONER DUNLAP, ARE YOU
PRESENT
COMMISSIONER DUNLAP
?
WE'RE JUST DOING A ROLL CALL.
>> IT LOOKS LIKE LOOKS LIKE
YOU'RE HERE.
IT LOOKS LIKE HE'S HERE.
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE SURE I
JUST SECOND TO SEE IF ANYBODY
ELSE TOO I THINK THAT'S
EVERYBODY THAT WE HAVE TODAY
WHERE IT LOOKS LIKE WE HAVE
COURT APPROVAL.
THE AGENDA THERE ARE TWO ITEMS
ON THE CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS TO
THE CONSENT AGENDA?
ALL RIGHT, CNN IS THERE A
MOTION TO APPROVE CONSENT
AGENDA BY DARMA SECONDED BY BY
APRIL ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE
SAY YES OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
>> YES, I SUPPOSE ALL THOSE
OPPOSED PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE
YOUR HAND READ THE CONSENT
AGENDA IS A PROVED.
NEXT UP IS A PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PERSONS TO SPEAK FOR UP TO
THREE MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL
NUMBER EIGHT THREE THREE FIVE
FOUR EIGHT
ZERO TWO EIGHT TWO
AND ENTER THE MEETING.
I'D NUMBER NINE SIX SIX TWO
FOUR EIGHT EIGHT NINE FOUR FIVE
EIGHT OR CONNECT THE ZOOM AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA, CITY
STAFF WILL SELECT COLORS THAT
RAISE THEIR HAND ONE BY ONE
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR YOUR
ZIMRIDE IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK TO PLEASE PRESS STAR LINE
ON YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE
RAISE OF YOU AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET
AREA AND ANY TELEVISION OR
BACKGROUND SOUND SO THEY CAN
HEAR YOU CLEARLY ARE WE HAVE
ANY MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC WHO
WISH TO SPEAK.
>> I'M SHOWING AT LEAST ONE
WITH THEIR HAND RAISED ADAM.
SO I'M GOING TO ALLOW YOU TO
TALK AND THEN YOU WILL HAVE
THREE MINUTES.
I WILL GIVE YOU 30 SECOND
WARNING WHEN YOU'RE BEFORE YOUR
TIME IS UP.
>> HI, THIS IS ADAM DRASKOVIC
CALLING FROM LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN
THE FOURTH WARD.
I'VE SPOKEN AND WRITTEN TO CITY
COUNCIL A NUMBER OF TIMES THE
TOPIC OF SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL.
SO WHEN I SAW YOU WOULD BE
DISCUSSING IT TONIGHT I TOOK
INTEREST SINCE THERE'S NOT MUCH
INFORMATION IN YOUR AGENDA
ABOUT WHAT EXACTLY WILL BE
DISCUSSED, I'M GOING TO GIVE MY
THOUGHTS ON THE TOPIC AND I
HOPE TO HEAR SOME OF MY
CONCERNS ADDRESSED.
>> PROPERTY OWNERS HAVE A
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY TO KEEP
THE SIDEWALK ADJACENT TO THEIR
PROPERTY CLEAR OF SNOW.
NICE PEOPLE GET UPSET WHEN THEY
RECEIVE A TICKET FROM THE CITY
FOR FAILING TO DO SO.
OTHERS GET UPSET WHEN THEY SEE
SOMEONE WHO'S NOT PHYSICALLY
ABLE TO DO THE WORK, GET
PUNISHED AND OTHERS GET UPSET
WHEN THEY HAVE TO NAVIGATE AND
CLEARED SIDEWALKS.
WE'VE CREATED PROGRAMS LIKE
SNOW MATCH AND WE'VE MADE SOME
IMPROVEMENTS TO OUR ORDINANCES
BUT HASN'T BEEN ENOUGH.
THERE'S STILL MANY UNCLEARED
SIDEWALKS EVERY WINTER WE NEED
TO BE MORE SERIOUS ABOUT OUR
COLLECTIVE RESPONSIBILITY TO
MAINTAIN A CONNECTED, SAFE AND
ACCESSIBLE NETWORK OF SIDEWALKS
HERE AROUND SIDEWALKS ARE AN
ESSENTIAL PART OF OUR
TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
AND THEY NEED TO BE TREATED AS
SUCH.
TO THAT END THERE'S A FEW
THINGS I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
HAPPEN.
A NUMBER OF YEARS AGO STAFF
LOOKED INTO THE POTENTIAL COST
OF HAVING THE CITY MANAGE
SIDEWALKS SNOW REMOVAL NOT A
LOT SEEMS TO COME OF THAT.
I'D LIKE TO SEE US TAKE FURTHER
STEPS TOWARD CREATING SUCH A
PROGRAM.
IF WE CAN CLEAR STREETS FOR
CARS WE CAN AND SHOULD CLEAR
SIDEWALKS FOR PEDESTRIANS.
WE NEED TO IMPROVE ENFORCEMENT
OF OUR EXISTING ORDINANCE.
THE COMPLAINT BASED ENFORCEMENT
MECHANISM IS NOT WORK SEEK
QUICK FIX REQUESTS DO NOT GET
ADDRESSED IN A TIMELY MANNER
AND THERE SEEMS TO BE
EFFECTIVELY NO WEEKEND
ENFORCEMENT.
IDEALLY WE SHOULD HAVE
PROTECTED PROACTIVE ENFORCEMENT
INSTEAD OF WAITING FOR
COMPLAINTS.
OUR CURRENT ORDINANCE LETS THE
CITY CLEAR A SIDEWALK AND BUILD
A PROPERTY OWNER.
I WAS TOLD THE CITY DOESN'T USE
THIS REMEDY VERY OFTEN.
WHY NOT?
CAN WE CHANGE THAT?
IT'S A BIT CURIOUS TO ME THAT
THE AGENDA ITEM CALLS OUT
RESIDENTIAL SNOW REMOVAL.
MANY IF NOT MOST OF THE
UNCLEARED SIDEWALKS.
I ENCOUNTER OUR COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES ALONG MAJOR
CORRIDORS LINED WITH BUSTARDS
STORES, RESTAURANTS AND OTHER
DESTINATIONS.
>> LOTS OF PEOPLE NEED TO WALK
ON THESE CORRIDORS TO GET TO
THEIR BUS STOP OR TO WORK OR TO
BUY GROCERIES.
INCIDENTALLY, MANY OF THESE
BUSINESSES DO AGREE DO A GREAT
JOB OF CLEARING THEIR PARKING
LOTS BUT IGNORE THEIR SIDEWALKS
.
>> IT MAKES SENSE TO TREAT
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES
DIFFERENTLY FROM RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES AND I'M NOT SURE I'D
SUPPORT CITY MANAGED SNOW
REMOVAL FOR BUSINESSES BUT I
HOPE WE CAN FIND A WAY TO
ENSURE THAT COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES ALONG MAJOR
CORRIDORS AND BUS ROUTES ARE
ALSO IN COMPLIANCE.
PROACTIVE ENFORCEMENT ALONG
THESE ROUTES WOULD DO THAT.
>> I LOOK FORWARD TO THE
DISCUSSION.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU
.
>> WELL WELL I THINK YOUR MUTED
ORIANNA ARE TELLING ONE OTHER
GUEST ROSS WOULD YOU LIKE TO
SPEAK PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND.
IF NOT, I BELIEVE THAT MAY BE
ALL FOR PUBLIC COMMENT THIS
EVENING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU TO THE PUBLIC FOR
SPEAKING AND I'D LIKE TO URGE
THE COMMISSION MEMBERS TO TAKE
A LOOK AT THE EMAILS THAT WE
RECEIVED SEPTEMBER OCTOBER IS
ABOUT A HALF DOZEN OR SO.
THOSE ARE IN THE PACKET.
NEXT UP BUSINESS THERE ARE NO
BUSINESS ITEMS SCHEDULED FOR
THIS MEETING, NOTHING TO VOTE
ON TONIGHT.
SO MOVE ON TO INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION.
FIRST UP IS THE RESIDENTIAL
SNOW REMOVAL AND WINTER
ACCESSIBILITY DISCUSSION BY
PAUL MATTHEWS.
SO UNLESS ANYBODY ELSE HAS ANY
OTHER INTRODUCTION I BELIEVE
OF THE FLOOR IS YOURS
OK
EVERYBODY SEE MY SCREEN.
WE CAN MAKE IT OK.
SO TODAY I THINK SLIGHTLY
MISLEADING TO TO THINK THAT THE
TOPICS THAT RESIDENTIAL SNOW
REMOVAL AS AS IT PERTAINS TO A
SIDEWALK SO I WAS PLANNING TO
JUST DISCUSS THE WINDS THAT WE
HAD LAST WINTER SOME OF THE
AREAS WHERE WE'RE WORKING TO
MAKE SOME IMPROVEMENTS AND THEN
DISCUSS KIND OF THE WINTER SNOW
MAINTENANCE PROJECT OUR PROCESS
CITY WIDE AND THEN THE NEW
ORDINANCE THAT WAS PASSED FOR
PARKING BAN.
SO I NOTICED THERE ARE A COUPLE
OF NEW PEOPLE ON OUR BOARD SO I
WANTED TO GO OVER KIND OF MIGHT
BE A LITTLE REDUNDANT FOR SOME
BUT OTHERS IT WILL BE NEW FOCUS
TALKING ABOUT WHAT OUR WINTER
MAINTENANCE GOAL IS AND PUBLIC
WORKS WE AIM TO MAKE SURE THAT
OUR ROAD MAINTENANCE IS SUCH
THAT OUR SERVICES ARE SAFE FOR
REASONABLE SPEEDS.
WE MAINTAIN ALL OF OUR PUBLIC
ROADS, OUR BIKE LANES, ALL THE
PROTECTED BIKE LANES AND THEN
OUR SIDEWALKS.
WE WORK TO MAINTAIN SOME OF THE
AREAS WITHIN THE DDA AND THEN
WE RELY ON PROPERTY OWNERS FOR
PRIVATE SIDEWALKS AND THEN WE
HAVE CONTRACTORS THAT ARE
MAINTAINING CITY SIDEWALKS THAT
ARE CITY RIGHT AWAY ALL THE
PEDESTRIAN ISLANDS, CORNERS,
BUMP OUTS, SIDEWALKS THAT ARE
ALONG AREAS WHERE YOU DON'T
HAVE AFFRONTING RESIDENTS
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE OUR PARKS
DEPARTMENT SIDEWALKS HAVE A LOT
OF PEOPLE THAT ARE RESPONSIBLE
FOR DIFFERENT AREAS WITHIN OUR
ROAD WINTER ROAD MAINTENANCE WE
MAINTAIN A VERY LARGE ROAD
NETWORK.
WE HAVE THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY
SIX LANE MILES AND WE ALSO
MAINTAIN ALL OF OUR SCHOOL
AROUND WHO ARE OUT TO MAINTAIN
ANY TIME SCHOOL'S IN SESSION.
THEY'RE ALSO MAINTAINED ON
WEEKENDS AFTER SCHOOL BUT THEY
ARE NOT PRIORITIZED THE SAME
WAY THEY ARE WHEN SCHOOL IS IN
SESSION THEN OUR LOCAL ROADS WE
TYPICALLY ALWAYS AT FOUR INCHES
OR MORE BUT MORE OFTEN THAN NOT
WE START AT LOWER AMOUNTS THREE
INCHES SOMETIMES A LITTLE LESS
JUST DEPENDING ON WHAT KIND
OF PRECIPITATION WE'RE
EXPECTING OR HAVE AND WHAT OUR
TEMPERATURES ARE GOING TO BE
LATER ON.
SO BIKE LANE MAINTENANCE IT'S A
NEW CHALLENGE FOR US.
THIS IS THIRTEEN POINT TWO
MILES OF BUFFER BIKE LANES.
WE KNOW WE HAVE A LOT MORE THAT
HAVE JUST COME ONLINE THIS YEAR
AND THOSE ARE MAINTAINED WITH
ONE FULL TIME EMPLOYEE THAT
WE'VE PULLED FROM ROADS THAT IS
DEDICATED TO THOSE BUFFERED AND
PROTECTED BIKE LANE AREAS.
LAST YEAR WE ADDED A SECOND
PERSON TO THOSE BIKE LANES
BECAUSE WE HAVE SO MANY AND
THEN ALL THE DIFFERENT BUMP
OUTS AND POLES AND THINGS THAT
ARE PUT IN ALONG THE BIKE
LANES, THEY TAKE A SPECIAL
PERSON TO DRIVE OUT SOMETIMES
JUST WITH THE TRUCK AND TRAILER
TO CLEAN AROUND THE ONE THAT'S
IN AN INTERSECTION THERE.
THEY'RE TREATED VERY THEY'RE
HIGH ON OUR PRIORITY LIST AND
THEY'RE TREATED ACCORDINGLY.
WE ALSO HAVE NINETY POINT TWO
MILES OF ON-STREET BIKE LANES
AND THOSE ARE TREATED IN
CONJUNCTION WITH OUR ROADWAYS.
SO ONE AREA THAT WE STRUGGLED
WITH THOSE OVER THE YEARS ARE
THAT THEY'RE ON THE RIGHT HAND
SIDE OF THE ROAD.
THEY DON'T RECEIVE TRAFFIC.
SO WHEN YOU THROW ANTI ICE OR
DOWN THEY DON'T GET THE SAME
TRAFFIC AND FRICTION AND HEAT
THAT THE REST OF THE ROADWAY
GETS.
SO THEY ARE THEY CAN BE A
PROBLEM SO WE ORDER WE'VE
ORDERED A BUNCH OF NEW TRUCKS
TWO YEARS AGO AND THEY ACTUALLY
JUST GOT HERE TWO MONTHS AGO
AND THEY'RE ON THE ROAD NOW BUT
THEY WILL ALLOW US TO GET OUR
DISSERVES LIQUIDS AND THINGS
OVER INTO THAT RIGHT HAND SIDE
OF THE ROAD WHERE WE'VE
STRUGGLED IN THE PAST.
SO THAT'S GOING TO BE A NEW
CHANGE THAT SHOULD HELP THOSE
BREAK UP FASTER AND SOONER THAN
THEY THEY HAD IN THE PAST WHEN
THEY WHEN WE HAVE A BIKE LANE
MACHINE THAT IS USING A BROOM
OR A BRUSH AND LIQUIDS AND
PUTTING FIRST DOWN, IT'S MUCH
EASIER IN THOSE BUFFORD AREAS
THAN THEY ARE ON THE ROAD.
SO WE'RE HOPING TO SEE A LARGE
IMPROVEMENT THERE OUR SIDEWALKS
PATH AND REFUTE ISLAND.
SO LIKE I SAID EARLIER, WE HAVE
THREE DIFFERENT GROUPS THAT ARE
MAINTAINING THOSE.
THIS MAP IS LAST YEAR'S MAP
THAT WAS SHOWING KIND OF THINGS
DIVIDED UP BETWEEN PARKS AND
PUBLIC WORKS AND WE WORKED TO
PUT A NEW MAP TOGETHER.
I'LL SHOW YOU LATER THE RIGHT
AWAY SIDEWALKS.
AS WE SAID, OUR RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTY OWNERS ARE RESPONSIBLE
AND THEY HAVE TWENTY FOUR HOURS
TO CLEAR THEIR SIDEWALKS OR
NONRESIDENTIAL OR HAVE A MORE
STRICT POLICY WHICH IS THAT
THEY HAVE TO HAVE EVERYTHING
HERE BY NOON ANY ACCUMULATION
PRIOR 6:00 AND BY NOON THAT
SAME DAY AND THEN THE CITY
ALWAYS PROVIDES A FREE SALT
SAND MIXTURE AT MULTIPLE
LOCATIONS.
THERE IS THE SNOW MATCH PROGRAM
THAT AIMS TO HELP PEOPLE
THAT
NEED SOMEONE TO ASSIST CLEARING
SNOW AT THEIR HOMES AND THEN
ALL OF THIS SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE IS ENFORCED BY OUR
COMMUNITY STANDARDS UNIT UNDER
THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
>> SO WE HAVE A LOT
OF CHALLENGES HERE.
WE HAVE LIMITED STAFF, WE HAVE
LIMITED RESOURCES.
WE HAVE NOT ADDED NEW STAFF
MEMBERS AS WE'VE ADDED A LOT
OF THESE MORE COMPLEX
MAINTENANCE HEAVY TREATMENTS
WITHIN OUR RUNWAYS ALL THE BIKE
LANES, BUMP OUTS, POSTS, THINGS
THAT WE'RE NOT THERE.
THEY DO TAKE A TREMENDOUS
AMOUNT OF TIME AND DETAILED
WORK TO MAKE SURE THAT THEY'RE
SAFE AND PASSABLE FOR PEOPLE.
WE ALSO HAVE ODD WEATHER
PATTERNS.
WE'RE GETTING A LOT MORE
FREEZING RAIN COMING IN OR
FLASH FREEZING AFTER WE'VE HAD
QUITE A FEW TREE EVENTS IN THE
MIDDLE OF OUR SNOW STORMS WHICH
PULL OUR FORESTRY EMPLOYEES OUT
OF SNOWPLOW TRUCKS TO CLEAR
ROADS OF DEBRIS AND YARDS AND
SIDEWALKS.
SO WE'VE HAD A LOT
OF CHALLENGES OVER THE LAST FEW
YEARS AND THEN OUR EXPECTATIONS
ARE CHANGING WITH THE USE MORE
OF THE USE OF BICYCLES AND
PEDESTRIAN FOCUSED ITEMS.
AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE SOMETIMES
A LACK OF COOPERATION AND AND
PROPERTY OWNER MAINTENANCE IS
LACKING IN SOME AREAS BUT HERE
WE HAVE A WHOLE BUNCH OF TOOLS
THAT WE USE SO THAT WE MAKE
SURE THAT WE'RE PREPARED AND
READY FOR OUR RESIDENTS TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE CAN ADDRESS ANY
ANYTHING THAT'S COMING IN.
WE HAVE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
WEATHER SOLUTIONS WE USE WE
MONITOR THE WEATHER TWENTY FOUR
HOURS A DAY FROM HOME ON
PHONES.
WE HAVE CAMERAS THAT WE CAN GET
ON OUR PHONES NOW TO TO CHECK
WHAT OUR ROADWAYS LOOK LIKE.
WE'RE UTILIZING TRAFFIC
CAMERAS.
WE HAVE FRONT FACING CAMERAS,
VEHICLES SO WE CAN REAL TIME
NOW SEE A LOT OF THINGS THAT WE
COULD NOT SEE FROM AN OFFICE IN
THE PAST TO HELP MOVE PEOPLE
AROUND THE CITY DEPENDING ON
WHAT'S HAPPENING IN THE NORTH
SIDE AS OPPOSED TO THE SOUTH
SIDE AND THEN UTILIZE SOME
OF THE MORE TRADITIONAL ITEMS
ACCU OTHER FOR NOAH AS WELL.
BUT WE PRIMARILY RELY ON SOME
OF THE SMALLER WEATHER STATIONS
FOR OUR DATA.
THESE ARE JUST KIND OF A LOOK
AT WHAT WE SEE ON THE BACK END
IN OUR OFFICES.
THESE TWO PURPLE DOTS ARE WHERE
OUR CURRENT TRAFFIC CAMERAS
ARE.
WE MONITOR THE PAVEMENT
FORECAST, WE MONITOR PAVEMENT
TEMPERATURES SO WE KNOW WHAT
MATERIALS WE NEED TO PUT DOWN
AND WHEN THEY'RE ACTUALLY
CHANGING THIS YEAR WE'RE GOING
TO RUN THEM MORE NORTH AND
SOUTH THREE DIFFERENT WAYS AND
ALSO MONITOR BRIGSTOCK SO THAT
WE KNOW WHAT TEMPERATURE THOSE
ARE AND CAN ANTICIPATE WHEN
THEY'LL FREEZE AS OPPOSED TO
THE ROADWAYS EARLY AND LATE IN
THE SEASON.
THESE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
RESOLUTION THAT WE GET FROM
THOSE CAMERAS AND THEN AGAIN WE
KNOW WHAT THE PAVEMENT
TEMPERATURE IS.
WE KNOW WHAT IT EVERYTHING THAT
IT IS IN ANN ARBOR INSTEAD
OF JUST UTILIZING YOUR STANDARD
WEATHER THAT WE GET LUMPED IN
WITH OTHER COMMUNITIES DETROIT
AND THINGS.
SO HERE ARE SOME OF THE
FORECASTING SERVICES THEY TELL
US WHEN IT'S COMING.
WHEN DO YOU EXPECT AND WHEN WE
SHOULD BE TREATING AND GET
MAINTENANCE SOLUTIONS TO US OR
SUGGESTIONS TO US FOR THE
AMOUNT OF MATERIAL TO USE?
SO LAST YEAR WE HEARD FROM THE
COMMUNITY WE WORKED TO MAKE A
LOT OF CHANGES.
WE SECURED SOME NEW TECHNOLOGY.
WE'VE BEEN LOOKING AT NEW
TECHNOLOGY.
I'LL TALK ABOUT SOME OF THOSE
COMING UP.
WE ADDED THE CONTRACTED
SERVICES LAST YEAR SO WE ADDED
SUPPLEMENTAL RESIDENTIAL
SNOWPLOWING THAT WAS DEPLOYED
TWO DIFFERENT TIMES, WAS VERY
SUCCESSFUL AND HELPED US MAKE
IT THROUGH THE CITY AND SPEND A
LOT MORE TIME ON OTHER THINGS
THAT WE'VE NEVER HAD THE TIME
TO SPEND.
AND THEN WE ALSO HAD OUR
SIDEWALKS SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES
LAST YEAR IT WAS A LITTLE BUMPY
GETTING IT STARTED AND JUST
GETTING OUR CONTRACTOR TO KNOW
THE CITY AND AND RESPOND TO US
AND GIVE US THE SERVICE WE WERE
LOOKING FOR TOOK US ABOUT
HALFWAY THROUGH AND THEY
STARTED TO REALLY BE HONEST AND
THAT CONTRACTOR WILL BE RENEWED
THIS YEAR SO WE SHOULDN'T HAVE
THE SAME GROWING PAINS THAT WE
HAD LAST YEAR.
WE'LL JUST HAVE SOME ADDITIONAL
STOPS AND WE'VE PUT A LOT OF WE
LEARNED A LOT FOR COMMUNICATION
WITH THEM AND UTILIZING OUR
WORK WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AS
WELL.
SO WE HAVE A LOT BETTER HANDLE
ON THE CUSTOMER AND AND THEY
HAVE A BETTER HANDLE ON HOW TO
COMMUNICATE TO US.
AS I SAID BEFORE WE DID WE'VE
HAD NEW EQUIPMENT ORDERED FOR A
COUPLE OF YEARS.
IT JUST GOT HERE.
SO WE NOW HAVE NEW TRUCKS FIVE
OR SIX NEW TRUCKS THAT ARE IN
SERVICE RIGHT THIS RIGHT NOW
AND THEN EVERY YEAR WE HAVE NEW
TRUCKS COMING ONLINE TO
MODERNIZE OUR SNOW FLEET.
WE ALSO PUT INTO PLACE THE NEW
SNOW PARKING BAN ORDINANCE SO
THAT ORDINANCE WAS REVISED LAST
YEAR AND WE'VE BEEN WORKING
THROUGH THE COMMUNICATION PLAN
AND WE HAVE SECURED A
COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY COP TWO
PLUS THEM.
THEY'RE GOING TO HELP US REACH
OUT TO THE COMMUNITY AND WE'LL
TALK A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
THAT AND ANOTHER SLIDE.
THESE ARE JUST SOME OF THE NEW
TECHNOLOGY THAT WENT ONLINE
LAST YEAR.
WE'LL HAVE IT IN A COUPLE
OF NEW TRUCKS BUT THIS KIND
OF SHOWS YOU WHAT WE'RE UP
AGAINST WHEN WE'RE OUT ON A
SNOWSTORM.
THIS IS JUST OUR STANDARD TWO
LANE ROAD IN ANN ARBOR WITH
PARKING ON BOTH SIDES HAPPENS
TO BE A MAJOR ROAD.
YOU CAN SEE WHAT OUR DRIVER IS
SEEING AND HOW SMALL THESE
SPACES WITH CARS PARKED ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE ROAD.
WE PUT INTO PLACE THE NEW SNOW
PARK OR SNOW PLOW TRACKING MAP.
SO THIS MAP NOW SHOWS OUR
TRUCKS ARE WHERE WE'VE BEEN AND
WHERE WE INTEND TO GO NEXT AS
WE PLOW WE ALSO PUT MESSAGING
OUT THAT SCROLLS ACROSS THE TOP
TO TELL YOU EXACTLY WHAT WE'RE
DOING, WHERE IT WILL BE AND
WHAT YOU CAN EXPECT AS A DRIVER
ON THE LEFT HAND SIDE WE KNOW
WHAT WHAT OUR ANTICIPATED PLAN
IS FOR THE ORDER THAT WE'RE
GOING TO TREAT THINGS.
SO THAT'S NEW AND ONLINE.
WE'RE WORKING ON A STREET
SWEEPING MAP CURRENTLY WITH THE
SAME VENDOR THAT SHOWS WHERE
WE'RE SWEEPING ALL OF OUR MAJOR
SWEETBRIAR AND IT EVEN SHOWS
WHEN WE'VE SWEPT OR WILL SWEEP
ALL THE PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
SO OUR PLAN IS ONCE WE GET
GROUND TRUTH AND GET THE BIKE
LANES SWEEPING PORTION
COMPLETED, WE'LL ALSO PUT BIKE
LANES ON THIS MAP AS ANOTHER
FEATURE WHERE YOU WILL KNOW
THAT WE HAD A TRUCK AND A BIKE
LANE AND WHEN IT WAS THERE SO
YOU CAN KIND OF SEE WHAT YOUR
ROUTE WILL LOOK LIKE IF YOU
CHOOSE TO RIDE A BIKE ON THE
PROTECTED BIKE LANE NETWORK.
SO THAT'S NEW AND THAT WILL
COME ONLINE.
BUT LIKE I SAY, WE'RE GROUND
TRUTH WITH OUR OUR SWEEPING MAP
CURRENTLY THE FAT CONTRACT AND
SIDEWALK CLEARING THAT WAS JUST
THE NEW VENDOR THAT WAS PUT IN
LAST YEAR.
ALL THESE ITEMS ARE LOCATIONS
WHERE IT'S IT'S PRIMARILY
HANDWORK AND IT'S A SMALL
SECTION OF SIDEWALK OR A
PEDESTRIAN ISLAND.
THEN THE LONGER SECTIONS WERE
AREAS WHERE THEY TYPICALLY
CLEAR WITH A BROOM.
WE ADDED A HANDICAPPED RAMP
MAINTENANCE WITHIN THE DDA AND
THIS WAS DEPLOYED TWO DIFFERENT
TIMES LAST YEAR.
SO IN LARGE SNOW EVENTS THE
STORE OWNERS ARE RESPONSIBLE
BUT WE ALSO SENT OUR CONTRACTOR
THROUGH JUST TO MAKE SURE
EVERYTHING WAS CLEAR AND AND
TWO OF THOSE EVENTS AND THAT
WAS VERY SUCCESSFUL.
AND ONE THING I CAN TELL YOU IS
WE'VE BEEN IN TALKS WITH THE
MEDIA AND THEY WILL HAVE A
PROPOSAL COMING FORWARD IN
JANUARY BUT THEY'RE LOOKING TO
TAKE OVER DENHA MAINTENANCE FOR
SNOW AT ALL THE HANDICAP RAMPS
ANY OF THE HANDICAPPED PARKING
SPACES ARE IN TOWN AND THEN
THEY WOULD ALSO CLEAR AREAS
AROUND BIKE INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO ANY OF THE HOOPS AND THINGS
TO LOCK YOUR BIKES UP.
SO THEY'RE LOOKING AT A
PROPOSAL FOR MAINTENANCE THAT
WOULD THAT WOULD TAKE OVER
MAINTAINING THOSE AREAS AND
THEN STORE OWNERS WOULD ONLY BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE SIDEWALK.
>> SO THIS YEAR OUR PLAN IS TO
CONTINUE WITH OUR PREVIOUS PLAN
OF CLEARING HANDICAP RAMPS
DURING HEAVY EVENTS UNTIL OR
AND IF THAT IS APPROVED BY
COUNCIL.
SO THE CONTRACTED RESIDENTIAL
PLOWING LAST YEAR WAS ONLY IS
OUR CONTRACTOR THAT WE AWARDED
IT TO THEY WERE ONLY AWARDED OR
THEY ONLY BID ON FOURTEEN
SECTIONS SO WE HAVE TWENTY
THREE SECTIONS IN TOWN SO THAT
FOURTEEN SECTIONS WE COULD ONLY
DEPLOY THEM PRETTY MUCH ON THE
SOUTH SIDE OF THE CITY AND THE
WAY WE DEPLOY LOCAL ROADS IS
HEAVILY FOCUSED ON WHERE OUR
TRASH ROUTES ARE SO WE NEVER
SEND PLOW TRUCKS INTO A
NEIGHBORHOOD IF TRASH IS
EXPECTED TO BE COLLECTED THE
NEXT DAY DUE TO THE FACT THAT A
LOT OF PEOPLE COME RIGHT HOME
FROM WORK, PULL THEIR CART OUT,
SAID DOWN THE ROAD AND THEY GO
INSIDE AND NEVER COME OUT
DURING THAT EVENT.
SO IF WE WERE TO PLOW WE END UP
KNOCKING OVER A LOT OF CANS AND
CAUSING A LOT OF PROBLEMS FOR
US.
SO WE'RE WE'RE HEAVILY FOCUSED
ON THAT.
SO IF IT HAPPENED TO BE AN
EVENT WHERE TRASH IS GOING TO
BE THERE COULD ONLY BE USED IN
A CERTAIN AREA THAT WE HAD TO
DO WE HAD TO WORK AROUND THAT.
SO THIS YEAR WE HAD THEM BID ON
ALL TWENTY THREE SECTIONS AND
WE WILL BE ABLE TO DEPLOY THEM
WHEREVER WE NEED TO AS SOON AS
WE'RE READY TO START PLOWING
WHICH IS AFTER JUST AFTER THE
SNOW STOPS FALLING SO
THAT WILL
BE THINGS THIS YEAR AND AN
IMPROVEMENT AS WELL.
RESIDENTIAL ROADS TALKED ABOUT
EQUIPMENT IMPROVEMENTS AND THEN
JUST TALK ABOUT OUR WHY WE
NEEDED TO MAKE THE CHANGE TO
THE SNOW PARKING BAN SO OUR OLD
OUR METHODS TO PLOW WHEN THE
STREETS ARE CROWDED WITH CARS
WE MISS THE CURBS.
WE'RE SLOW.
WE HAVE TO COME BACK FOUR DAYS
AFTER WE'RE SERVICING
COMPLAINTS FROM RESIDENT WHO
MIGHT HAVE HAD SOMEONE ELSE'S
CAR PARKED IN FRONT OF THEIR
HOUSE AFTER AND THEY WANT US TO
REMOVE THE SNOW ROSE.
SO THIS ORDINANCE NOW WHEN WE
ENACT IT WOULD ALLOW US TO
IMPROVE OUR PLOWING, IMPROVE
OUR RESPONSE.
IT'S A LOT FASTER WHEN YOU'RE
NOT WEAVING IN AND OUT OF CARS
AND TRYING TO GET AROUND CARS
EVERY YEAR WE HAVE CARS THAT
ARE DAMAGED ALSO FROM PLOWS AND
THEN WE ALSO HAVE BLACK STORM
DRAINS.
IT'S REALLY HARD TO CLEAR RAMPS
SO THIS IS REALLY THE REASON WE
WE LOOKED TO CHANGE.
HERE'S ANOTHER LOCATION WHERE
WE HAVE THIS TRAFFIC COMING IN
HERE NOW.
BUT BECAUSE OF THAT YOU CAN'T
PLOW OR DO ANY DETAIL.
YOU HAVE TO PICK YOUR PLOW UP
AND DRIVE OVER THE CURB AS YOU
CAN SEE.
WELL, WE KIND RUBBED IT SO WE
HAVE THESE KIND OF THINGS ALL
OVER TOWN AND WE'RE JUST
PLOWING THE MIDDLE OF THE ROAD
WHICH YOU CAN SEE IN THIS
LOCATION WHERE YOU KNOW, YOU
COULD HAVE AN ISLAND OF FOUR
FEET OF SNOW OR A PEDESTRIAN
WOULD HAVE TO CROSS THAT
BECAUSE NOBODY'S RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE CLEARING AFTER.
SO THESE ARE SOME OF THE REAL
REASONS THIS THIS BAN WAS IT
WAS NECESSARY.
A QUICK LOOK AT LAST YEAR WE
HAD A WINTER STORM THAT'S
PRETTY EASY NORMAL YEAR FOR US
,40 INCHES OF SNOW.
WE DID HAVE SOME REALLY COOL
TIMES OR TEMPERATURES AS YOU
CAN SEE ON A MILD WINTER AND
THIS IS PROBABLY NOT A GREAT
SIDE FOR THIS PRESENTATION.
SO I APOLOGIZE BUT LAST WINTER
WAS WE SPENT JUST UNDER A
MILLION DOLLARS THE TWENTY
THREE SNOW EVENTS THAT WE HAD
AND ONLY TWO OF THOSE WERE
LARGE ENOUGH.
WE'RE PLOWING OUR LOCAL ROADS
BUT LAST YEAR WAS A GOOD YEAR
SO THE LARGE EVENTS WE DID
RECEIVE A LOT OF POSITIVE
FEEDBACK FROM THE COMMUNITY.
WE HAD RESIDENTS THAT SENT
NOTES INTO US TO SAY THAT THIS
WAS THE FASTEST THEY HAD HAD
THEIR LOCAL ROAD PLOWED OVER.
WE HAD A LOT OF PRAISE ON
SIDEWALKS AND A LOT OF PEOPLE
THAT JUST SENT US NOTES THAT
THEY WERE APPRECIATIVE WHEN WE
GOT THOSE FROM COUNCIL AS WELL
AS RESIDENTS.
SO I DROPPED A COUPLE IN THERE.
BUT LAST YEAR WE DID DISCUSS
OUR OUR SNOW ROUTE MAPS FOR
SIDEWALKS.
I KNOW WE YOUR COMMISSION ASKED
THAT WE MAKE SOME IMPROVEMENTS
AND SOME CHANGES TO THAT AND WE
COMBINE THEM.
SO THIS IS THE NEW COMBINED MAP
SHOWING EVERYTHING THAT THE
CITY UNDER ONE ROOF IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR.
SO THIS IS LAST YEAR.
SO NONE OF THE NEW
INFRASTRUCTURE THAT HAS GONE IN
THIS YEAR IS TRANSLATING TO
THIS MAP YET.
BUT AS SOON AS IT'S UPDATED
THEY'RE WORKING ON IT RIGHT NOW
TO PUT ALL THE LAST ALL THE
ENGINEERING PROJECTS FROM THE
SUMMER IN.
WE WILL MAKE THIS LIVE ON OUR
SIDEWALKS.
PAGE ONE IMPROVEMENT THAT WE
MADE LAST YEAR TOO.
THIS IS WE TOOK A LOOK AT OK,
WHERE ARE COMPLAINTS COMING IN
AND WE WE'RE WORKING ON MAKING
IMPROVEMENTS TO HOW THEY'RE
RECEIVED WITHIN THE CITY.
SO THE WAY TO FIX IT WORKS IS
ALL OF THOSE SERVICE REQUESTS
FOR SNOW AND ICE ON A SIDEWALK
GO DIRECTLY TO COMMUNITY
STANDARDS AND THEY GET A YOU
KNOW, THEY GET A LOT OF TRAFFIC
SO AS YOU CAN SEE WE HAD THIRTY
EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIXTY THREE
SERVICE REQUESTS THAT WE LOOKED
AT TO IDENTIFY SOLUTIONS SO THE
MAPS WE WANT IS WE LOOKED AT OR
SIXTY FIVE FEET FROM A SIDEWALK
THAT IS MAINTAINED BY THE CITY
SO MAINTAINED EITHER PARKS
DEPARTMENT OR OUR NOW MY
CONTRACTOR JUST TO SEE IF WE
CAN MAKE SOME IMPROVEMENTS TO
HOW THOSE SERVICE REQUESTS ARE
HANDLED INTERNALLY.
SO WE NOW HAVE A BUFFER SET UP
AROUND ALL OF THE SERVICE
REQUESTS OR ALL OF THE AREAS
OF CITY SERVICES SO THAT THEY
DON'T GO INTO THE SAME BUCKET
OF SERVICE REQUESTS WHERE IT
CAN BE THOUSANDS DURING A LARGE
SNOW EVENT CERTAINLY ALWAYS
HUNDREDS.
BUT NOW AS LONG AS SOMEONE
GEOCODE THAT OR USES A TO FIX
THAT CLOSE TO ONE OF THOSE
SIDEWALKS, IT WILL
AUTOMATICALLY GET SENT TO
PUBLIC WORKS OR YOU
AUTOMATICALLY GET SENT TO PARKS
OR COMMUNITY STANDARDS BASED ON
WHO'S RESPONSIBLE FOR THAT
MAINTENANCE.
SO ANYTHING THAT WOULD HAVE
MAYBE TAKEN TWO TO THREE DAYS
TO GET TO ME OR TO GET TO OUR
PARKS DEPARTMENT WILL NOW BE A
LOT FASTER.
IT'LL BE AUTOMATICALLY SENT TO
THOSE AREAS.
SO THAT WAS A HUGE IMPROVEMENT
AND ONE THAT SHOULD DEFINITELY
HELP OFTEN THESE THREE THOUSAND
EIGHT HUNDRED AND SIXTY THREE
COMPLAINTS OR FIVE YEARS ONLY
SIXTY FIVE OF THEM WERE A CITY
OWNED PARCEL OR A PART PARCEL.
SO THERE WEREN'T VERY MANY BUT
WE DID GET TO THE POINT WHERE
WE CAN GO THROUGH THE DATA AND
FIND OUT REALLY HOW MANY HOW
MANY WERE OUR RESPONSIBILITY
AND WE'LL BE ABLE TO ADDRESS
QUICKER AND THEN TO TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THIS NO
PARKING BAN ORDINANCE WE WORK
TO SIMPLIFY THE LANGUAGE SO
IT'S REALLY EVERYBODY IT'S NOT
IT WAS IT WAS ALWAYS ONE STREET
OR THE OTHER AND THEN YOU HAD
TWELVE HOURS TO OR YOU HAD A
FOUR HOUR WINDOW WHERE YOU CAN
MOVE YOUR CAR FROM ONE OTHER
SIDE TO THE SO WE REALLY
COULDN'T USE THE SNOW BAND
ORDINANCE TO EFFECTIVELY PLOW
BECAUSE WE MIGHT PLOW ONE SIDE
AND THEN WE HAVE TO COME BACK
AND HIT THE OTHER SIDE AND IT
JUST WASN'T EFFECTIVE AND SO WE
LOOKED AT WHAT CAN WE DO?
SO WE'RE WE'RE LOOKING TO
PROVIDE EXEMPTIONS BASED ON
CERTAIN CONDITIONS AND SO THAT
CONDITION WAS WE LOOKED AT THE
ENTIRE CITY USING GOOGLE WE
USING DRIVING AND LOOKING AND
JUST ALL OF THE TOOLS IN OUR
HANDS AND AND WE CAME UP WITH
AREAS THAT ARE EXEMPT FROM OUR
BAN BASED ON INABILITY TO HAVE
A DRIVEWAY.
SO IF YOU DON'T HAVE A DRIVEWAY
THERE IS AN EXEMPTION FOR THAT
AND THEN ANYONE WHO IS
HANDICAPPED AND HAS A
HANDICAPPED PLACARD IS ALSO
EXEMPT FROM IT.
BUT EVERY OTHER STREET WITH
DRIVEWAYS IT'S EXPECTED THAT
THEY WOULD COMPLY WITH THE NEW
SNOW BAN.
WE WOULD ALWAYS CALL IT A
MINIMUM TWENTY TWELVE HOURS IN
ADVANCE TO USE SOCIAL MEDIA,
TELEVISION STATIONS, WEBSITES,
EMAIL BLAST.
WE'RE GOING TO RELY ON EVERY
BRIDGE WHICH IS A SUBSCRIPTION
AND THEN RADIO KIND OF THE SAME
WAY OUR COMMUNITIES COMMUNICATE
THAT INFORMATION OUT AND THEN
WE'LL USE SOME OF OUR OWN
INTERNAL TOOLS.
WE'VE SET UP A WEBPAGE FOR IT,
A WAY FOR PEOPLE TO SUBSCRIBE
TO OUR ALERTS, LOOK AT OUR
STREET EXEMPTION MAP REQUEST
THE STREET EXEMPTION AND THEN
THE ORDINANCE LINKS TO OUR
PARKING STRUCTURES.
OUR PLAN IS TO WE HAVE HIRED OR
ARE ABOUT TO HIRE I THINK IT
GOES TO COUNCIL AT THE NEXT
MEETING BUT KUNM IS GOING TO BE
PUTTING TOGETHER A PACKAGE
OF COMMUNICATIONS OUT TO GET
THE WORD OUT SO THAT WILL BE
EXCITING AND THIS IS JUST KIND
OF A LOOK AT WHAT WE HAVE
DETERMINED TO BE EXEMPT SO
ANYWHERE WITHIN THE DENHA WE
ALREADY HAVE AN ENFORCEMENT
MECHANISM BECAUSE PARKING IS
NOT ALLOWED TWENTY FOUR HOURS A
DAY SO THOSE AREAS WERE EXEMPT
AND THEN LOCATIONS SUCH AS
PINFIELD VILLAGE WHERE THEY
HAVE DRIVEWAYS AVAILABLE TO
THEM AND RIDGWAY'S SOME SMALL
AREAS WHERE THERE IS A LACK
OF PARKING FOR RESIDENTS
MEANING NO PARKING OUR
IMPLEMENTATION.
SO WE'VE BEEN WORKING WITH OUR
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT TEAM, OUR
CITY COMMUNICATIONS DEPARTMENT,
APD AND OUR COMMUNITY STANDARDS
DEPARTMENT TO DISCUSS AND TO
PLAN HOW WE'RE GOING TO GOING
TO COMMUNICATE THIS AND WHEN WE
WOULD SO WE HAVE ALREADY HAD
SOME SNOW BANDS AND WORKED
THROUGH DIFFERENT WEATHER
EVENTS AND FORECASTS THAT ARE
REALISTIC TO PRIOR YEARS TO
DETERMINE WHEN WE WOULD CALL
IT.
WE PLAN TO HAVE A MULTI-YEAR
RAMP UP TO BUILD OUR PUBLIC
MUSCLE MEMORY AND AWARENESS AND
THAT'S WHERE TO AN END COMES
IN.
AND THEN AS FAR AS THIS YEAR
GOES WE ARE GOING TO SEEK
VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE BUT WE
WILL ENFORCE IT IF NECESSARY
WHERE WE WERE UNABLE TO PLOW
THROUGH LOCAL ROADS.
WE'RE PUSHING A CREATE A GO TO
PLAN FOR YOUR HOUSEHOLD AND
YOUR EMPLOYEES.
YOU KNOW, MAKE SURE PEOPLE WHO
WILL MOVE THEIR VEHICLE WHERE
WE ARE GOING TO PUT OUR
VEHICLES AND THEN MAKING SURE
THAT PEOPLE HAVE THEIR KEYS
AVAILABLE TO THEM AND THEY'VE
THOUGHT OUT WHERE THEY WOULD GO
IF THEY DO NEED TO PARK
SOMEWHERE ELSE AND THEN I'VE
GOT A COUPLE OTHER THINGS WE
ARE TALKING WITH ANN ARBOR
TRANSPORTATION ATAH TO
DETERMINE WHICH STOPS THEY ARE
CURRENTLY CLEARING ON THE
ROUTES SO USUALLY THEY ONLY
CLEAR THEIR HIGH RIDERSHIP
ROUTES AND SO WE'RE LOOKING TO
THEY'RE GOING TO GIVE THEIR
DATA OVERLAY IT ON OUR MAPS AND
WE'RE WORKING TO SEE HOW MANY
OF THOSE STOPS ARE ON A
SIDEWALK THAT WE'RE ALREADY
MAINTAINING WITH OUR CONTRACTOR
TO SEE IF WE CAN ASSIST THAT
THOSE STOPS GET THEM TO
POTENTIAL HAD SOME OTHER STOPS
THAT THEY DON'T CLEAR CURRENTLY
JUST TO TRY TO SEE WHERE WE WE
CAN ASSIST THEM WITH OUR
EFFORTS AND AND NOT DUPLICATE
THINGS.
WE'RE ALSO WORKING ON A PILOT
PROJECT RIGHT NOW WE'RE TALKING
TO A COMPANY CALLED SNOW
BIOTICS.
>> SO THEY HAVE AUTONOMOUS
SNOWPLOW VEHICLES AND FORD
MOTOR VEHICLES.
SO WE'RE WORKING TO SEE HOW
THEY COULD POTENTIALLY FIT INTO
THE MIX IN THE FUTURE.
WE'RE WE'RE WE'RE WE DON'T HAVE
ENOUGH ASSISTANCE NOW THAT THAT
COULD BE ANOTHER TOOL IN OUR
TOOLBOX AND THEN HOW THEY
INTERACT WITH THE WALKING
PUBLIC SO THAT IF WE CAN WORK
EVERYTHING OUT WE WILL HAVE A
PILOT THIS WINTER AND WE'LL SEE
WHAT THOSE HOW THOSE WORK FOR
US.
SO SO YES, SO THAT'S SOME
OF THE NEW STUFF THAT WE HAVE
GOING ON AND KIND OF THE NEW
ITEMS THAT WE PUT IN LAST YEAR
.
SO IF THERE ARE ANY QUESTIONS
OPEN DISCUSSION OF THOSE A
LITTLE BIT OF A REFRESHER BUT A
LOT OF GREAT NEW MATERIAL TOO.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, PAUL.
WHAT QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS DO
PEOPLE HAVE IT?
THANKS FOR THANKS FOR THAT
UPDATE AND I'M SUPER OPTIMISTIC
ABOUT OUR SNOW REMOVAL THIS
WINTER SO I'M LOOKING FORWARD
TO SEEING HOW IT GOES.
THE YOU MENTIONED THE WIND ROWS
THAT GET LEFT BEHIND AND THAT'S
ONE PLACE WHERE I FEEL LIKE WE
COULD DO A LITTLE MORE OUTREACH
MAKING SURE THE PROPERTY OWNERS
UNDERSTAND THAT THE YOU KNOW,
THE PILE OF SNOW THAT'S LEFT BY
THE PLOW AT THE CURB IN A CURB
CUT IS THEIR RESPONSIBILITY TO
REMOVE AND LIKE LIKE I'VE ASKED
FOR BEFORE SOME CLARIFICATION
ABOUT WHOSE RESPONSIBILITY THAT
IS.
I MEAN IF IT'S IN THE STREET I
ASSUME IT'S STILL OPERATIONS
RESPONSIBILITY BUT IF IT HAS
BEEN PUSHED UP ONTO THE
SIDEWALK, I EXPECT THAT TO THE
CURB RAMP.
I WOULD EXPECT THAT IT'S THE
HOMEOWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY AND
I YOU HAVE A GRAPHIC THAT SHOWS
THE HOMEOWNERS ARE WHAT THEY'RE
SUPPOSED TO REMOVE AND I WAS
JUST THINKING THAT SOME LET'S
SEE KEEP GOING BACK TO IT.
THAT'S ONE OF THE FIRST ONES
THERE IT IS I THINK FORWARD
ONE.
YEAH.
YEAH THAT ONE I THINK A LITTLE
BIT MORE CLARITY THERE AND WHAT
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO DO WOULD BE
HELPFUL LIKE DO THEY NEED TO GO
TO THE EDGE OF THE GUTTER PANDE
THEY NEED TO GO TO THE THE EDGE
OF THE THE SIDEWALK FLAG IN THE
CURB APPROACH LIKE WHERE IS
THEIR RESPONSIBILITY BECAUSE
EVEN YOU KNOW 12 OR 18 INCHES
OF UNPLOWED SNOW IN THIS AREA
CAN BE A VERY BIG OBSTACLE IF
IT'S BEEN MOUNTED BY A PLOW AND
BY A YOU KNOW, HOMEOWNER.
SO THIS IS LIKE A CRITICAL
POINT RIGHT AT THAT GUTTER
THAT'S THAT'S ONE THING.
AND THEN I WOULD JUST LIKE TO
REITERATE WHAT OUR CALLER
MENTIONED ABOUT ABOUT NOT BEING
AFRAID OF OF ACTIVATING THE
CITY TO REMOVE THE SNOW ON
PROPERTIES THAT ARE NOT
CLEARED.
WE HAVE THAT ABILITY AND I
THINK WE SHOULD BE EXERCISING
AND PEOPLE ARE NOT CLEARING OUR
SIDEWALKS APPROPRIATELY FOR THE
YOU KNOW, FOR THE BENEFIT
OF EVERYONE THAT WE CAN HAVE A
A A FULL NETWORK SO ANYWAYS
AGAIN, THANKS VERY MUCH.
I'M REALLY LOOKING FORWARD TO
SEEING HOW ALL THIS WORKS OUT
THIS WINTER.
DARRYL, THANK YOU AND THANKS
FOR THE PRESENTATION.
>> I WANTED TO SPEAK JUST
BRIEFLY TO THE CALLER BECAUSE
THEY TALKED ABOUT RESIDENTIAL
SIDEWALK SNOW REMOVAL AND
WANTED FOR PEOPLE WHO ARE NEAR
TO THIS GROUP THAT DON'T KNOW
THE HISTORY THE CITY UNDERTOOK
A STUDY OF DIFFERENT SCENARIOS
OF WHAT WOULD BE REQUIRED TO
REMOVE SNOW FROM RESIDENTIAL
SIDEWALKS AND I'M HAPPY TO
SHARE THE MEMO WITH ANYBODY
THAT WOULD LIKE TO SEE IT AFTER
THIS CALL WAS PRODUCED IN LATE
TWENTY TWENTY ONE AND I BELIEVE
IT WAS PRESENTED TO THIS GROUP
.
THERE ARE SIX SCENARIOS THAT
WERE LAID OUT WITH DIFFERENT
KINDS OF SOLUTIONS WITH
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF SERVICE AT
THE LOW END THE ESTIMATED COST
AGAIN IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE WAS
ONE POINT THREE DOLLARS MILLION
AND THEN IT WENT ALL THE WAY UP
TO TWENTY TWO MILLION DOLLARS
ALONG WITH THE FINDINGS OF THAT
REPORT WERE SOME
RECOMMENDATIONS THAT WERE MADE
IN TERMS OF ORDINANCE CHANGES
AND WANTED TO REMIND FOLKS THAT
WE DID MAKE SOME CHANGES LAST
SUMMER.
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR REGARDING
THE FINES ASSOCIATED WITH NOT
REMOVING THE SNOW ALSO
CLARIFYING THAT YOU CAN USE
ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION AND TO
GET IN TOUCH WITH AN OWNER'S
AGENT THAT'S ALLOWING FOR
QUICKER RESPONSE TIMES AND
CHARGING MORE FOR
NONRESIDENTIAL THAN TO
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES.
SO I DON'T THINK IF I REMEMBER
CORRECTLY WE DIDN'T HAVE A LOT
OF SNOW LAST YEAR SO I THINK A
LITTLE BIT REMAINS TO BE SEEN
HOW EFFECTIVE THIS HAS BEEN.
THANKS.
SO THINGS DHARMA I'LL BE
INTERESTED TO SEE THAT MEMO
BECAUSE THAT DEFINITELY
PREDATES MY TIME.
I JUST WANT TO I WANT TO AT
LEAST ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I AGREE
WITH WHAT I THINK ADAM SAID IF
I'M IF I UNDERSTOOD IT A
CORRECTLY WHICH IS THAT
PHILOSOPHICALLY I DO STRUGGLE
WITH THE IDEA THAT WE PUT THE
ONUS ON PROPERTY OWNERS TO
CLEAR THE SIDEWALKS BUT THE
STREETS WE DO NOT AND IT'S A
SUBSIDY PREFERENCE TO CAR
TRAFFIC OVER PEDESTRIAN AND A
LOT OF INSTANCES BIKE TRAFFIC
AND I GET THAT IT IS MAYBE NOT
ECONOMICALLY FEASIBLE TO DO
SOMETHING ELSE BUT I JUST I
DON'T PHILOSOPHICALLY AGREE
WITH THAT AND I DO THINK THAT
THAT THAT WE SHOULD BE KIND
OF COGNIZANT OF EVEN IF WE
CAN'T NECESSARILY CHANGE THAT.
I DO THINK IT SHOULD IMPACT
KIND OF HOW PUNITIVE THAT WE
GET ABOUT IT.
I FEEL LIKE IT IS MORE
APPROPRIATE FOR IT TO BE AN
ASKWITH AND ENCOURAGEMENT WITH
KIND OF YOU REMEDIAL MEASURES
AVAILABLE IF IF NECESSARY OR A
VERY ROBUST PROCESS TO KIND
OF ARRANGE FOR ALTERNATIVES.
I I KNOW THAT'S VERY PIE IN THE
SKY.
IT WON'T RESULT IN FULLY CLEAR
SIDEWALKS BUT I DO I DO
STRUGGLE WITH THE IDEA THAT FOR
SOME UNKNOWN REASON THIS IS ON
PROPERTY OWNERS INSTEAD OF THE
CITY
.
THANK YOU, PAUL.
GREAT INFORMATION.
MATT CARPENTER WITH THE TRANSIT
AUTHORITY AND WE'RE HAPPY TO
WORK WITH YOU GUYS IN TERMS
OF IDENTIFYING WHERE THE STOPS
WE DO CLEAR.
I WANTED TO ASK IF THERE'S BEEN
ANY THOUGHTS SINCE LAST YEAR
ABOUT THE PERENNIAL PLOWING
WIND ROLLING IMPACTING BUS
STOPS ISSUE AND JUST FOR
EVERYBODY ELSE EVERY YEAR WE
KIND OF HAVE THE SAME CHALLENGE
THAT THE PLOWING WILL CREATE A
WIND ROW RIGHT IN FRONT OF A
BUS STOP MAKES IT HARD TO
DEPLOY A RAMP, GET PEOPLE ONTO
THE BUS OR IT WILL PUSH THE
SNOW INTO ESPECIALLY THE BUS
STOP AND IT'S A PERENNIAL
CHALLENGE.
I JUST WANT TO ASK PAUL IF
THERE'S BEEN ANY NEW
DEVELOPMENTS IN THAT SPACE FROM
HIS TEAM, ANY NEW THOUGHTS
ABOUT HOW WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO
WORK TOGETHER ON YEAH, THAT'S
THE SAME CHALLENGE WE HAVE.
I KNOW WITH WITH ALL OF OUR
EVERYONE'S DRIVEWAY REALLY IN
TOWN AND AS WELL AS OUR CURB
CUTS AND OUR CHALLENGE IS THAT
WE YOU KNOW, WE'RE PROVIDING
BULK PLOWING SERVICES FOR EIGHT
HUNDRED LANE MILES OF ROADWAY
AND AND IT'S REALLY HARD TO TRY
TO DETAIL YOU KNOW, PUT THE
DETAILS INTO TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT HOW TO AVOID EVERYTHING
RAMP DRIVEWAY, BUS STOP.
AND I WAS ACTUALLY SHOCKED WE
OVERLAID OUR MAP WITH WITH YOUR
BUS STOPS PRIOR TO HAVING A
DISCUSSION WITH A MEMBER
OF YOUR TEAM AND I WAS
SURPRISED AT HOW MANY BUS STOPS
THERE ARE IN TOWN.
SO HUNDREDS AND HUNDREDS.
YES.
AND SO WE'RE WE'RE JUST
STARTING TO EXPLORE WHAT WE CAN
DO TOGETHER LIKE SAY WE'RE
WE'RE GETTING YOUR HIGH
RIDERSHIP DETAILS WILL BE SENT
TO US.
WE'RE GOING TO OVERLAY THAT ON
OUR MAP TO SEE WHERE ARE YOUR
HIGH HIGH RIDERSHIP STOPS ON
OUR ROUTES THAT I KNOW I WAS
THAT YOUR STAFF CLEARS YOU KNOW
ALL AWAY.
AND SO WE'RE GOING TO TAKE A
LOOK AT WHERE THOSE ARE AND
WE'RE GOING TO WE'RE STARTING
THAT CONVERSATION NOW SO WE'RE
GOING TO SEE WHAT WE CAN DO TO
COMMUNICATE SAY HEY, WE'RE DONE
ON THE STREET.
WE WILL NOT BE BACK.
SO THAT IS YOUR LAST WINDROW OR
YOU WHAT CAN WE DO TOGETHER?
SO THAT'S A NEW CONVERSATION
WE'RE HAVING WITH YOUR STAFF
AND LOOKING FORWARD TO SEEING
WHAT WE CAN DO.
I CAN'T MAKE ANY PROMISES AS
FAR AS NOT LEAVING A WINDOW
THERE BUT I CERTAINLY AM AWARE
THAT THAT'S A CHALLENGE FOR BUS
RIDERS AND CITED IN
DISABILITIES.
AND SO YEAH, WE'RE GOING TO
WE'RE STARTING THOSE
CONVERSATIONS NOW AND WE'LL SEE
WHERE WE CAN.
I APPRECIATE THAT AND WE LOOK
FORWARD TO THE CONVERSATION AS
A SIDE NOTE FOR EVERYONE.
WE HAVE REPLACED ALL OF THE
TIRES ON ALL THREE BUSSES TO BE
MORE AGGRESSIVE FOR TRACTION IN
THE SNOW IN EACH BUS HAS
SIX
TIRES.
DO THE MATH.
THAT'S OVER SIX HUNDRED TIRES.
SO IT'S A LOT OF TIRES.
BUT THANK YOU, PAUL.
WE LOOK FORWARD TO WORKING.
YEAH, YOU AND THE OTHER
COMMENTS SELECTED A QUESTION
AND MAYBE MORE FOR DARMA.
I KNOW THERE WAS DISCUSSION
OF THE DDA EXPANDING ITS
BOUNDARIES AND I'M JUST CURIOUS
HAS THAT HAPPENED YET OR IS
THAT STILL IN DISCUSSION?
AND IF THOSE BOUNDARIES ARE
EXPANDED WITH THE SNOW REMOVAL,
EXPAND WITH A THAT'S A GREAT
QUESTION.
SO WE HAVEN'T VOTED ON IT YET.
I KNOW THAT THE D.A. HAS THE
SHRUNK THEIR CONCEPT OF WHAT
THE EXPANSION SHOULD BE DO I
THINK TWO AREAS OUT OF THE
INITIAL THAT WERE PROPOSED AND
THAT IS A GOOD QUESTION.
I KNOW THAT REGARDING LIKE THEY
DO PLAN TO IMPLEMENT A DOWNTOWN
FORGET IT THEY CALLED IT LIKE A
MAINTENANCE CLEANING GROUP.
BUT I DON'T KNOW THAT THEY
EXPLICITLY TALKED ABOUT SNOW IN
THAT.
SO IT'D BE A GOOD QUESTION TO
FOLLOW UP WITH WHEN THAT COMES
FORTH THAT I KNOW OTHER KINDS
OF QUESTIONS.
>> I WANT TO THANK YOU AGAIN,
PAUL, FOR BRINGING THIS AND
ESPECIALLY INFORMATION AND LIKE
PIZZA DEFINITELY I'M OPTIMISTIC
ABOUT HOW IT GOES THIS WINTER.
HAPPY TO SEE THE IMPROVEMENTS
THAT YOU ALL HAVE MADE OVER THE
LAST COUPLE OF YEARS,
ESPECIALLY IN GOING FORWARD.
SO I THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT UP ON THE INFORMATION AND
DISCUSSION SECTION IS THE SAFE
STREETS FOR OUR QUICK ROAD AND
SPEED MANAGEMENT UPDATE WITH
ERIC WHO I BELIEVE IS ON THE
CALL AND ARIANNA IS HAVE ERIKA
SPRINGSURE I I'M NOT SURE IF
ANYONE ELSE NEEDS TO DO AN
INTRODUCTION BUT IF NOT OR IS.
NO, I JUST WANT TO SAY HELLO.
GOOD EVENING, SUZANNE.
I'M THE TRANSPORTATION PLANNER
FOR THIS PROJECT AND JUST THANK
HIM FOR THE INVITATION THIS
EVENING AND I WILL TURN THINGS
OVER TO ERIC IN JUST A MOMENT.
FOR EVERYONE'S BENEFIT WE WILL
BE DOING A BRIEF PRESENTATION
THIS EVENING THAT FOCUSES ON
OUR PROJECT OVERVIEW, OUR
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT SUMMARY
THAT WE JUST COMPLETED THIS
FALL QUICK BUILD TOOLS THAT
WILL BE DEPLOYING AND THE QUICK
BUILD PROJECT SUMMARY.
AND I DO ASK THAT YOU HOLD YOUR
QUESTIONS UNTIL THE END.
THAT WAY WE CAN GET THROUGH THE
PRESENTATION AND I WILL WELCOME
ERIC HOBBS FROM TI WILIN.
HELLO.
THANK YOU FOR THE INTRODUCTION
SUZANNE.
THANK YOU FOR THE OPPORTUNITY
TO PRESENT TO CAN EVERYONE SEE
MY SCREEN.
IT LOOKS GOOD THE PERENNIAL
QUESTION THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
WE WILL GIVE YOU AN OVERVIEW
TONIGHT OF THE PROJECT.
SOME OF IT WILL BE REVIEW.
WE WILL BE IN BRIEF LETTING YOU
KNOW WHAT WE HEARD DURING OUR
TWO PHASES COMPLETED COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT WILL SUMMARIZE THE
QUICK BUILD TOOLS WE SELECTED
AND TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT HOW
THOSE TOOLS ARE BEING APPLIED
TO THE PROJECTS THAT ARE MOVING
THROUGH DESIGN PRESENTLY.
>> SO FOR THOSE WHO HAVE NOT
HEARD ABOUT THE PROJECT OR NEED
A REFRESHER THIS IS A PROJECT
THAT IS FUNDED BY A UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION STREETS AND
ROADS FOR ALL GRANT THAT WAS
AWARDED TO THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
THE TOTAL VALUE FROM FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS THREE POINT EIGHT
MILLION AND THAT HAS BEEN
MATCHED LOCALLY WITH THERE ARE
THREE COMPONENTS IN THE GRANT
APPLICATION TO BECOME TWO
PROJECTS THE FIRST TWO BULLETS
ABOUT BUILD PROJECTS AND SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROJECTS HAVE BECOME
THIS PROJECT UPDATE THAT YOU'RE
HEARING AND THEN THERE IS A
THIRD PIECE WHICH YOU WILL HEAR
ABOUT AT A LATER TIME I BELIEVE
ABOUT THE NEAR MISS VIDEO
ANALYTICS PORTION OF THE GRANT
.
>> I REALIZE THAT I MAY HAVE A
POOR CONNECTION.
WAS I BREAKING UP AT ALL?
>> SOUNDED PRETTY GOOD.
OK, GREAT.
SORRY FOR THE PAUSE SO IF ANY
IF I IF THAT DOES HAPPEN I
APOLOGIZE.
MY HOME INTERNET IS A LITTLE
SPOTTY TONIGHT AND IF YOU COULD
JUST LET ME KNOW ON MIKE THAT
WOULD BE GREAT IF I DO STOP
RETURN TO WHERE WHERE I WAS SO
JUST A LITTLE BIT OF A REVIEW
OF THE PROJECT BENEFITS THE
THIS PROJECT CAME OUT OF AND IS
INTENDED TO DELIVER ON
STRATEGIES IN THE MOVING
TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION ZERO
TRANSPORTATION MASTER PLAN.
ITS EMPHASIS IS ON HIGH CRASH
LOCATIONS ACROSS THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR.
THERE THE BEHAVIORS THAT THE
DESIGNS ARE INTENDED TO ADDRESS
ARE PRIMARILY THOSE DANGEROUS
DRIVING BEHAVIORS BEHAVIORS
ESPECIALLY SPEED.
IT IS QUICK BUILD TALK A LITTLE
BIT MORE ABOUT THAT IN A LITTLE
BIT AND IT ALSO IS DELIVERING
ON THE EXPANSION OF BIKE ROUTES
AND UPGRADING EXISTING BIKE
ROUTES THROUGHOUT THE CITY.
SO WE'RE TRYING TO ADDRESS ALL
OF THESE THROUGH THE QUICK
BUILD PROJECT IN TERMS OF THE
SCHEDULE WHERE HAVE WE BEEN?
WE TALKED TO YOU DURING OUR
PLANNING AND CONCEPTUAL DESIGN
PHASE AFTER WE HAD THAT
CONVERSATION WE MOVED A NUMBER
OF CORRIDORS WHICH I WILL SHOW
YOU IN A MOMENT INTO
PRELIMINARY DESIGN FOR THE US
DOT FEDERAL GRANT AGREEMENT FOR
THIS PROJECT.
WE HAVE TO GO AND REQUEST A
FEDERAL AMENDMENT TO UNLOCK THE
FINAL ENGINEERING AND
CONSTRUCTION PORTIONS OF THIS
PROJECT.
WE'RE STILL DOING SOME DESIGN
RELATED TASKS BUT IN ORDER TO
MOVE TO THAT FINAL DESIGN WHICH
IS ALLOWS US TO PREPARE THE
INSTRUCTION AND BITTING
PACKAGE, EXECUTE THE BIDDING
AND THEN GO TO CONSTRUCTION, WE
ARE AT A GATE WHILE WE AWAIT
THE FEDERAL HIGHWAY
ADMINISTRATION'S APPROVAL TO
MOVE FORWARD.
WE CITY STAFF SUBMITTED THAT
GRANT AMENDMENT IN SEPTEMBER.
WE WERE INFORMED THAT THE
REVIEW PROCESS THERE ARE FIVE
STAGES OF REVIEW ARE
POTENTIALLY ABLE TO LAST
BETWEEN THREE AND NINE MONTHS
WAS THE WINDOW THAT WE WERE
GIVEN BY OUR A CONTACT STAFF
HAVE BEEN DOING A GREAT JOB
COORDINATING ON SOME OF THE
QUESTIONS THAT WE'VE RECEIVED.
SO WE KNOW IT'S MOVING THROUGH
THE PROCESS.
IT'S BEING LOOKED AT BUT THERE
ARE MANY FACETS OF THE REVIEW
THAT ARE A LITTLE OPAQUE TO US
.
BUT THIS IS KIND OF A KEY PIECE
THAT I'M SURE YOU HAVE HEARD
ABOUT IN THE IN VARIOUS OTHER
VARIOUS OTHER FEDERAL GRANTS
AND THAT'S KIND OF WHERE WE ARE
AS A PROJECT.
BUT WE ANTICIPATE MOVING
FORWARD ONCE WE HAVE THE
ABILITY TO DO SO.
THE PROJECT LOCATIONS THE LAST
TIME WE MET WE SHOWED YOU
EIGHTEEN POTENTIAL CORRIDORS
ENCOMPASSING TWENTY TWO MILES
OF PROJECT LOCATIONS ACROSS THE
CITY.
THOSE ARE SHOWN IN THE MAP ON
THE SCREEN IN RED AS WELL AS
ORANGE.
WE HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH STAFF
COORDINATING WITH OTHER
PROJECTS INCLUDING ONGOING
PLANNING STUDIES LIKE THE LIKE
THE MULTI LANE ANALYSIS AS WELL
AS PROJECTS THAT HAVE RECENTLY
BEEN COMPLETED OR MOVING CLOSER
TO CONSTRUCTION.
WE HAVE TAKEN SOME OF THOSE
PROJECTS OFF THE TABLE TO FIT
EVERYTHING WITHIN OUR BUDGET
AND I WILL GO THROUGH SOME
OF THE PROJECT LOCATIONS FOR
YOU.
THERE IS A MAP OF MORE DETAILED
KIND OF LIST AT THE END BUT WE
HAVE SETTLED ON TWELVE CORRIDOR
MAPLE AND FOURTEEN TO DAXTER
LIMIT ROAD MAIDEN LANE ALL THE
WAY OUT TO GREEN WE HAVE
LIBERTY BETWEEN MAPLE AND
ASHLEY SEVEN FROM LIBERTY TO
CYO CHURCH ROAD PAULENE FROM
WEST STADIUM TO SEVEN CYO
CHURCH FROM OUR WHERE IT
TERMINATES THE CITY BORDER TO
SEVEN SO A LOT ON THE WEST SIDE
AS WELL AS MAIN FROM WILLIAM
ALL THE WAY DOWN TO EISENHOWER
PARKWAY EISENHOWER OUR GREAT
WAY FROM MAINE TO PACKARD
PACKARD FROM STATE TO
EISENHOWER PARKWAY THE PORTION
OF THE STATE BETWEEN GRANGER
AND STIMPSON AND LAST BUT NOT
LEAST GATTI'S FROM OBSERVATORY
ALL THE WAY TO HURON PARKWAY.
SO THAT'S WHAT WE HAVE BEEN UP
WITH.
THERE ARE A FEW SMALLER
CORRIDORS THAT WERE LEFT ON A
TABLE BECAUSE THEY EITHER
WEREN'T ABLE TO GET A MADE BUT
MAJOR PROJECT FOR QUICK BUILD
PERSPECTIVE DONE OR THERE WERE
OTHER THINGS THAT WOULD HAVE
POTENTIALLY CONFLICTED WITH IT
IN TERMS OF SOME CONSIDERATIONS
OVERALL WE DISCUSSED THIS
DURING OUR INITIAL MEETING.
THIS IS A FEDERALLY FUNDED
PROJECT WE NEED TO DO WE NEED
TO USE THE MONEY THAT WE HAVE
WITH THE CONSTRAINTS THAT COME
WITH IT IN THE BEST WAY
POSSIBLE.
>> SO THERE WE HAVE A WE DO
HAVE A DELIVERY TIME FRAME THAT
HAS BEEN UPDATED BASED ON OUR
NEGOTIATIONS WITH FEDERAL
HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION TO BE
FINISHED INSTALLED IN PLACE,
EVALUATED, REPORTED OUT BY
JANUARY TWENTY TWENTY NINE.
SO THAT'S A LITTLE OF A CHANGE
FROM LAST TIME WE TALKED TO YOU
GIVING YOU THE GIVING THE FULL
SIXTY MONTH GRANT PERIOD
ALLOWED UNDER UNDER THE
BIPARTISAN INFRASTRUCTURE LAW
ALL INFRASTRUCTURE HAS TO BE
TEMPORARY THIS IS A
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT SO WE
CANNOT DIG WE CANNOT USE
CONCRETE AND WE CAN NOT REALLY
DO ANYTHING THAT WOULD BE
ENVIRONMENTALLY DISRUPTIVE
BECAUSE WE HAVE TO FULFILL NEPA
AND NATIONAL HISTORIC
PRESERVATION ACT REQUIREMENTS
TO KEEP THINGS KIND OF AT A
MINIMUM OR ELSE THIS WOULD HAVE
BEEN A MUCH EVEN LONGER PROJECT
DELIVERY TIME.
THERE ARE ALSO PROJECT
CONSIDERATIONS THAT ARE
APPEARING
DURING OUR GRANT
AMENDMENT PROCESS THAT WE ARE
FOLLOWING.
WE DO NOT HAVE ANY CONFIRMATION
ON EXACTLY WHAT WILL CHANGE BUT
WE ALSO UNDERSTAND THAT THERE
HAVE BEEN QUESTIONS IN THE PAST
ABOUT POTENTIAL TO DO A ROAD
DIET THROUGH THIS PROJECT FOR
INSTANCE WE COULDN'T DO THAT
BASED ON OUR NEED FOR
PROCESSING IN THE TIMELINE THAT
WOULD HAVE ADDED TO THE PROJECT
AND NOW IT IS LOOKING LIKE
THOSE ARE NOT BEING WORKED
FAVORABLE.
THOSE TYPES OF IMPROVEMENTS ARE
NOT BEING LOOKED FAVORABLY ON
SO THERE WOULD BE SOME
CONSIDERABLE RISKS.
I THINK IT'S GOOD TO USE THIS
FUNDING CONSERVATIVELY AND HAVE
OTHER PROJECTS THAT ARE ABLE TO
TACKLE THOSE THOSE BIGGER
INITIATIVES, THOSE BIGGER
CHANGES TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT BUT
SUMMARIZE OUR APPROACH.
OUR APPROACH HAS REALLY BEEN TO
BUILD ON THE ENGAGEMENT THAT
CITY STAFF HAVE BEEN DOING OVER
THE PAST SEVERAL YEARS AND
ESPECIALLY THE ENGAGEMENT
THROUGH THE MOVING TOGETHER
TOWARDS VISION ZERO PLAN.
SO WE ARE REALLY AN INFORMED
LETTING PEOPLE KNOW WHAT THESE
PROJECTS ARE, WHERE THEY'RE
GOING TO BE, WHAT THE TIMELINE
IS, WHAT THEY'RE GOING TO LOOK
LIKE, ALLOWING SOME FORM
OF COMMENT ON THE PROPOSED
DESIGNS.
>> SO WE'VE BEEN SO FAR ENGAGED
IN TWO PHASES OF THAT
ENGAGEMENT.
WE TALKED WE HAD A DECEMBER
JANUARY THE VIRTUAL ENGAGEMENT
TO KICK OFF THE PROJECT THAT
INCLUDED A HIGH LEVEL LEVEL
PRESENTATION ON THE CITY'S
WEBSITE OFFICE HOURS SURVEY
WITH ONE HUNDRED RESPONSES WE
HAD GENERALLY A SUPPORTIVE
FEEDBACK ON THE QUICK BUILDS
AND AND SAFETY TREATMENTS MORE
GENERALLY WE DID HEAR THAT
PEOPLE WANT US TO THINK BIGGER.
WE TRIED TO MAKE AS BIG AS WE
COULD WITHIN THE NARROW
CONFINES OF THE GRANT BUT
AND
HAVE TRIED TO IMPLEMENT IT AS
FAR AS FEASIBLE AND THERE IS WE
DEFINITELY HEARD ABOUT THE NEED
FOR SAFE STREETS NOT JUST FOR
PEOPLE DRIVING AND WALKING BUT
ALSO BIKING.
SO THAT WOULD REALLY KIND
OF CONFIRMED OUR APPROACH.
WE RECENTLY COMPLETED AN UPDATE
TO THE PROJECT PUBLICLY SO THAT
ALSO INCLUDED A VIDEO UPDATE,
VIRTUAL INFORMATION.
>> THERE WAS THERE WERE THREE
POP UPS THAT THE TEAM HAD
ACROSS DIFFERENT EVENTS
THROUGHOUT ANN ARBOR IN
SEPTEMBER, LATE SEPTEMBER,
EARLY OCTOBER THERE WERE OFFICE
HOURS WE SAID INFORMATION
MEETING AT THE LIBRARY ON JUST
ABOUT LAST WEEK JUST ABOUT THIS
TIME LAST WEEK WE TALKED TO A
HUNDRED PEOPLE OR THEREABOUTS.
WE ARE HEARING VERY SIMILAR
THINGS ACROSS BOTH PHASES NOW
THAT WE'RE ROLLING OUT A LITTLE
BIT MORE OF WHAT WE'RE GOING TO
DO WHERE WE HEARD A LOT
OF SUPPORT PARTICULARLY FOR
ADDING DISSEMINATORS IN BUFFORD
BIKE LANES IN PLACES LIKE
PACARD.
AND THEN WE ALSO HEARD
SOMETHING THAT'S FAMILIAR I
WOULD IMAGINE TO THIS GROUP AND
FAMILIAR TO THE ENGAGEMENT THAT
WE'VE DONE ACROSS MULTIPLE
PHASES OF QUICK BUILD THAT
PARALLEL EDUCATION CAMPAIGN HOW
TO USE THESE WHAT THEY ARE
WOULD BE VERY BENEFICIAL.
SO THAT'S A LITTLE BIT OF WHAT
WE'VE BEEN HEARING.
>> I WILL KEEP GOING AND TALK
ABOUT THE TOOLS WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT THE TOOLS BEFORE SO THIS
WILL BE MORE OF A SUMMARY.
>> I'LL GO THROUGH THIS
RELATIVELY QUICKLY IN TERMS
OF OUR SCOPE WE'RE REALLY
THINKING PAINT POST SIGNS.
>> THAT'S WHAT WE CAN DO.
THAT'S WHAT WE CONSIDER TO BE
QUICK BUILD.
SO WHAT WHAT CAN WE DO WITH
THAT WITH THAT MENU OF OF
OPTIONS THERE WILL BE A HEAVY
RELIANCE ON MAKING BUFFORD
ADDING BUFFERS TO BIKE LANES
AND WHERE POSSIBLE SEPARATING
THOSE BIKE LANES TO CREATE
SEPARATION BETWEEN MODES USING
FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR LIKE THE
ONES THAT YOU CAN SEE A GOOD
EXAMPLE OF A PROJECT WITH THE
STATE STREET BETWEEN UNIVERS
AND HILL.
SO WE'RE ALSO WORKING ON ADDING
BIKE BOXES TO INCREASE
VISIBILITY AT SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS WHERE A BIKE LANE
IS ALREADY IN EXISTENCE AND
GOES UP TO THAT UP TO THAT
INTERSECTION WE ARE ADDING VERY
CONSISTENTLY AND HAVE CREATED A
LITTLE BIT OF A STANDARD FOR
WHERE TO INSTALL INTERSECTION
CONFLICT MARKINGS ESPECIALLY AT
THROUGH INTERSECTIONS BUT ALSO
AT MAJOR DRIVEWAYS.
SO THOSE WILL BE ADDED TO
EXISTING AND NEW FACILITIES.
THE NEXT PIECE THERE ARE
SEVERAL HADAN CENTER LINE
INSTALLATIONS ALREADY IN PLACE
IN THE CITY.
THIS WOULD EXPAND THE NUMBER
OF HARDENED CENTER LINE
INSTALLATIONS, SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTIONS TO BETTER
POSITION DRIVERS AS THEY CROSS
CROSSWALKS TO PREVENT HIGH
SPEED AND LOW ANGLE TURNS AND
IMPROVE VISIBILITY ALSO HELPS
OR AVOIDING CRASHES WITH HEAD
ON CRASHES AND LEFT TURN DAYS
PAIN AND POST BUMP OUTS ARE
GOING TO BE PART OF THE TOOLBOX
AS WELL MAINLY ON SIDE STREETS
BECAUSE MANY OF THE STREETS
THAT WE'RE WORKING ON DO NOT
HAVE ON STREET PARKING BUMP
OUTS ARE GREAT BUT THEY NEED TO
BE SHADOWED BY SOMETHING OR
ELSE THEY WILL BE HIT AND GONE
PRETTY QUICKLY.
SO WE HAVE A NUMBER
OF LOCATIONS WHERE WE ARE
CONSIDERING THOSE PANCOAST BUMP
OUTS WITH COLORED FIELD
FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR TO PREVENT
PARKING IN THE NO PARKING AREA
TRYING TO REDUCE THE IMPROVE
VISIBILITY, REDUCE CROP
DISTANCES AND REDUCE TURNING
SPEEDS ESPECIALLY ONTO STREETS
WITH BIKE FACILITIES SO THAT
EVERYONE HAS AWARENESS OF THE
ONCOMING ONCOMING USERS.
I'LL QUICKLY SUMMARIZE THE
PROJECT.
SO AGAIN HERE'S THE HERE'S THE
BIG THE BIG MAP AS A REFRESHER
,HOW DID WE GET HERE?
WE WERE REALLY CONCENTRATING
AGAIN ON THOSE PROJECT BENEFITS
WITH A LOOK AT THE TIER ONE AND
TWO SAFETY NETWORKS AND TRYING
TO PULL PROJECTS OUT FROM THAT.
WE COULD ALSO UTILIZE FAIRMEAD
SCORE FOR SPEED MANAGEMENT.
WE LOOKED AT FEASIBILITY THEN
WE ALSO STARTED TO LOOK AT THE
CAPITAL PROJECTS THAT WERE
PLANNED ROADWAY JURISDICTION.
WE ARE NOT WORKING ON ANY
ROADWAYS THROUGH THIS PROJECT
BUT THEN WE ALSO ARE LOOKING AT
FUTURE RESURFACING LISTS AND
MAKING SURE THAT WE ARE
MINIMIZING CONFLICTS OR FINDING
WAYS IN WHICH WE CAN WORK
AROUND OR WITH THOSE PROJECTS
TO GET THE PROJECT INSTALLED,
HAVE IT IN PLACE AND IMPROVED
RATHER THAN RATHER THAN RIPPED
OUT.
WANT TO MAKE THE MOST OF THIS
MONEY AND THAT THE TIME AND
INVESTMENT AND ENTHUSIASM THE
COMMUNITY PUTTING THIS PROJECT
IN PLACE SO YOU HAVE THAT YOU
WILL HAVE THIS IN YOUR POCKET.
THIS SUMMARIZES A VERY HIGH
LEVEL WHERE WE ARE WHAT WE ARE
APPLYING TO WHERE SO MANY
OF THE CORRIDORS I WON'T GO
THROUGH EACH AND EVERY ONE AND
JUST IN LIGHT OF YOUR TIME WE
CAN RETURN BACK TO US IF YOU
HAVE SPECIFIC QUESTIONS.
BUT MANY OF THESE CORRIDORS
HAVE EXISTING BIKE FACILITIES
WHERE WE ARE THERE'S AN
EXISTING BUFFER OR THERE IS
SPACE IN TRAVEL LANES THERE ARE
WIDE AND WE CAN RECLAIM SOME
OF THAT SPACE OUT A BUFFER AND
ADD FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR.
SO MANY OF THESE STREETS PACARD
STATE MAPLE, MAINE ALREADY HAVE
BIKE FACILITIES, ALREADY HAVE
BIKE FACILITIES BUT WE'RE JUST
UPGRADING AND UPDATING THEM
WHILE NARROWING.
WE'VE KIND OF MOVED TO A TEN
AND A HALF FOOT STANDARD TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN
ACCOMMODATE USERS ALL USERS
SAFELY.
WE HAVE A LOT OF TRANSIT ROUTES
HERE SO WE DON'T WANT TO WE
HAVEN'T GONE UNDER THAT TEN AND
A HALF EXCEPT FOR THERE I DON'T
THINK ANY LOCATIONS WE'RE ABLE
TO AVOID AVOID PINCH POINTS.
MANY OF THE OTHER TREATMENTS
ARE BASED ON WHETHER WE HAVE
THE GEOMETRY TO ADD BUT TO ADD
PAYING POST OR TO ADD THE
HARDENED CENTER LINE TREATMENTS
SO THAT WILL KIND DIFFER BY
CORRIDOR BUT WE HAVE A PRETTY
STANDARD PLAYBOOK ACROSS ALL
OF THESE PROJECT CORRIDORS.
IT'S GREAT BECAUSE WE'RE ABLE
TO TAKE AN IDEA THAT THE CITY
HAS SUCCESSFULLY IMPLEMENTED
I'M SORRY MY CAT HAS JUST
ADVANCED THE SLIDESHOW AND AND
IN AND CORRIDOR PIECES HERE AND
THERE AND THEN SCALE THEM UP
ACROSS THE CITY THROUGH THROUGH
THIS EFFORT THE WHAT THIS LOOKS
LIKE IN PRACTICE.
HERE'S A HERE'S OUR PLANS LAID
OVER A MOCKUP SO IT'S CLEARER
WHAT EVERYTHING LOOKS LIKE, HOW
IT ALL COMES TOGETHER.
THIS IS A SECTION OF PACARD
WHERE WE HAVE TRAVELING WITH
THAT WE CAN REAPPROPRIATE BACK
TOWARDS A A BETTER BIKE
FACILITY ADD DELINEATE SO YOU
CAN SEE THE ADDITION OF THOSE
ITEMS ON THIS ON THIS RENDERING
ADD INTERSECTION CONFLICT
MARKINGS THROUGH THOSE
INTERSECTIONS WE DON'T HAVE
DRIVE WE DON'T HAVE HIGH HIGH
UTILIZATION DRIVEWAYS HERE SO
YOU DON'T SEE THAT.
>> BUT ON THE BORDERS WHERE WE
DO HAVE THAT YOU WILL SEE
CONFLICT MARKING CONSUELOS
DRIVEWAY'S BIKE BOXES WHERE
THERE IS A BIKE FACILITY ON THE
APPROACH TO A SIGNALIZED
INTERSECTION AND PAYING POST
BUMP OUTS ON SIDE STREETS.
>> THEY ALSO HAVE AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR US TO HELP
IMPROVE SOME INTERSECTION
ALIGNMENT WHEN WE HAVE THESE
WHEN WE HAVE THESE SKEWES SO
YOU CAN SEE HOW THAT IS PUT IN
PLACE UNPASSED WANTED TO BE
QUICK SO THAT WE COULD HAVE
TIME FOR YOUR QUESTIONS.
I KNOW A LOT OF THIS IS REVIEW
I HOPE THAT EVERYONE'S KIND
OF AT THE SAME LEVEL.
I HOPE THERE'S SOME GOOD NEW
INFORMATION YOU CAN UNDERSTAND
WHERE WE ARE IN THE PROCESS,
HOW WE'RE APPLYING THE TOOLS,
WHERE WE'RE APPLYING THE TOOLS.
BUT WITH THAT I'LL I'LL I'LL
HOP OFF MIC AND LOOK FORWARD TO
ANSWERING ANYTHING THAT YOU
HAVE FOR US.
>> THANK YOU VERY THANK YOU.
>> QUESTIONS COMMENTS TO DO WE
HAVE DERMO
THANKS FOR THE
PRESENTATION AND EXPLAINING
WHERE WE ARE IN THE PROCESS.
I'M HOPING THAT SOMEONE CAN
EITHER YOU OR STAFF CAN CLARIFY
YOU KNOW OBVIOUSLY WE'RE
READING A LOT ABOUT IN THE
NEWS ABOUT PROJECTS BEING
HALTED BUT ARE FUNDED BY THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
I GUESS I HAVE TWO QUESTIONS.
ONE, THE GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
RIGHT NOW.
SO WHAT DOES THAT DOES KIND
OF PAUSE THE REVIEW PROCESS
INTO HOW SECURE IS THE MONEY OR
IS IT STILL KIND OF NOT QUITE
HERE?
>> I'LL JUMP IN ON THAT.
I WAS IN COMMUNICATION WITH OUR
FEDERAL HIGHWAY REP OVER THE
LAST TWO DAYS.
WE JUST SUBMITTED OUR QUARTERLY
REPORTING AND REIMBURSEMENT AS
PART OF THE GRANT AGREEMENT.
SO I FEEL LIKE THAT'S GOOD
NEWS THAT I HEARD FROM HER
FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
IS FUNDED WITH THE HIGHWAY
TRUST FUND BUT WE DON'T I DON'T
KNOW WHO BE ON FEDERAL HIGHWAY
WHO DOES HAVE TO LOOK AT THIS
GRANT AGREEMENT AMENDMENT MAY
NOT BE WORKING SO I CANNOT
ANSWER THAT FULLY AND
COMPLETELY BECAUSE THAT
INFORMATION HAS NOT BEEN
PROVIDED TO US AS A TEAM.
AND CAN YOU PLEASE REMIND ME
OF YOUR SECOND QUESTION HOW
ASSURED ARE WE THAT WE'RE GOING
TO GET THESE FUNDS LIKE HAVE
THEY ALL BEEN OBLIGATED OR
YEAH.
NO NO RIGHT NOW AS I HAD
PROVIDED PROBABLY AT THE LAST
CONVERSATION WE ARE OPERATING
UNDER CURRENTLY NINE HUNDRED
FIFTY THOUSAND DOLLARS
OF OBLIGATED FUNDS.
THE BULK OF THE FUNDING TO BE
UNLOCKED IS OUR FINAL DESIGN
PHASE OF THREE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THOUSAND DOLLARS AND
THEN OUR CONSTRUCTION PHASE
WHICH IS AROUND TWO POINT FOUR.
SO THE BULK OF THE FUNDING HAS
NOT BEEN OBLIGATED.
THAT DOES NOT MEAN THAT IT WILL
NOT BE WE ARE STILL PROCEEDING
PER OUR FEDERAL HIGHWAY
REPRESENTATIVE WITH THE GRANT
AGREEMENT AMENDMENT THAT IS THE
THREE TO NINE MONTH PHASE THAT
WE ARE IN RIGHT NOW AND I HAVE
NO INDICATION OTHERWISE THAT
FUNDING IS GOING TO BE PULLED.
WE HAVE NOT BEEN ADVISED ON
THAT AT ALL.
WE ARE MOVING FORWARD AS WE
HAVE THE CURRENT FUNDING
AVAILABLE AND WILL CONTINUE TO
DO SO UNTIL WE ARE INSTRUCTED
OTHERWISE
.
>> YES, THANKS TO THE
PRESENTATION.
SO YOU MENTIONED MAJOR STREETS
SPEED MANAGEMENT.
CAN YOU EXPLAIN A LITTLE BIT
MORE ABOUT THAT AND WHAT
STRATEGIES WE'RE USING FOR IT
AND HOW WE ARE MAKING SURE THAT
WE ARE SUCCESSFUL AND WHAT IS
OUR MEASUREMENT OF SUCCESS FOR
MAJOR STREETS SPEED MANAGEMENT
?
>> SO I THINK ERIC HAD
ADDRESSED THIS A BIT AND I WILL
HAVE ERIC COME OFF OF ME IN A
MOMENT.
I DO WANT TO REITERATE THAT THE
TOOLS THAT WE ARE ABLE TO
UTILIZE ARE PAVEMENT MARKINGS
AND VERTICAL DELINEATOR.
WE ARE NOT ABLE TO REDUCE LANES
WHICH MEANS TAKING AWAY A LANE
.
WE HAVE TO WORK WITHIN THE
EXISTING RIGHT OF WAY.
WE CANNOT MOVE CURB SO THERE
ARE LIMITATIONS IN TERMS OF THE
TOOLS AVAILABLE TO REDUCE THE
DRIVING SPEEDS OF THE CURRENT
PUBLIC.
SO WE ARE UTILIZING THROUGH A
SERIES OF DESIGNS AND ERIC, I'M
NOT SURE IF YOU COULD GO BACK
TO THAT SLIDE SO WE COULD
OUTLINE AGAIN WHAT THE
TREATMENT TYPES ARE AND I WILL
TURN THAT PART OVER TO YOU
.
>> YES, THANK YOU.
I THINK THAT'S A GOOD SITE TO
START WITH.
>> AND ERIC, YOU ARE ON MUTE.
YEP.
THANK YOU.
SO WHAT ARE WE DOING?
THERE ARE THINGS THAT WE CAN
AND CAN'T DO.
AS SUZANNE SAID, THE PRIMARY
TOOL THAT WE WILL BE USING IS
LANE NARROWING.
SO BRINGING EVERYTHING DOWN TO
TEN AND A HALF FEET.
WE HAVE A NUMBER OF LOCATIONS
ACROSS THIS CROSS THE PROJECTS
THAT HAVE WIDER WEALTH LANES
EISENHOWER FOR INSTANCE.
SO WE ARE ABLE TO TAKE UP SOME
OF THAT SPACE WITH BUFFERS AND
TO ADD A LITTLE BIT MORE
FRICTION WITH WITH DELINEATOR
POSTS ON STREETS LIKE
EISENHOWER WE FOUND
OPPORTUNITIES TO DO AT STRIPING
TO BE ABLE TO BUT WE CAN'T TAKE
THE LANES AWAY.
WE ARE ABLE TO BRING THEM IN,
TIGHTEN THEM UP COMING SPEEDS
OFF OF STS THAT ARE
INTERSECTING WITH OUR MAIN
STREETS WAS IS A GOAL AND
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE ADDRESSING
THROUGH OUR THROUGH PRE AND
POST CURVE EXTENSIONS OR ELSE
WE'RE DOING SOMETHING THAT YOU
DON'T SEE THIS ON THIS SLIDE
BUT WE ARE WHERE WE HAVE TWENTY
FIVE MILE AN HOUR OR LESS
POSTED SPEED LIMITS WE ARE
GOING TO BE REINFORCING THEM
WITH PAVEMENT LEGENDS AS WELL
THAT MATCH IN WITH OUR AND WITH
THE POSTED SPEED LIMIT SIGNS IN
TERMS OF EVALUATION WE ARE
CURRENTLY STARTING TO BELIEVE
OUR CONTRACTOR WILL BE IN THE
FIELD STARTING NEXT WEEK TO BE
PULLING OUR BEFORE SPEEDS AND
THEN WE WILL BE PULLING AFTER'S
SO FOR EVERY CORRIDOR EACH
QUARTER WILL HAVE MULTIPLE
SPEED BEFORE AND AFTER SITES
WHICH WILL ENABLE US TO TAKE A
LOOK AT WHAT IS THE EXISTING
SPEED, WHAT HAPPENED, WHAT
CHANGE AND EVALUATE WHETHER
ADDITIONAL WHETHER LANE
NARROWING ENOUGH IS
INSUFFICIENT AND WHETHER A
LARGER PROJECT, A BIGGER
IMAGINATION WOULD BE NEEDED TO
BE ABLE TO CHANGE THE SPEEDS TO
TO BRING THEM CLOSER TO TARGET.
THERE ARE DEFINITE WE ARE AT
THIS TIME PROPOSING CHANGES TO
SPEED LIMITS BUT WE COULD IF WE
HAVE THAT DATA IN HAND BE ABLE
TO SAY HEY, IT LOOKS LIKE WE'RE
ABLE TO START DROPPING SPEEDS
AND SOME OF THESE CORRIDORS
CLOSER TO THE TARGET THAT THE
CITY WOULD LIKE TO SEE FROM
POSTED SPEED TODAY.
SO THOSE ARE THE THOSE ARE THE
TOOLS AND SOME OF THE
EVALUATION STRATEGIES THAT WE
WILL USING TO SEE WHETHER THIS
PROJECT IS HAVING THE INTENDED
BENEFIT OR WHETHER FURTHER
INVESTMENT MIGHT BE NEEDED IN
THE FUTURE.
OK, THANKS FOR THAT ANSWER.
I GUESS THE OTHER THING I'D
LIKE TO OBSERVE IS THAT THE
PLIMOTH THE LIMITS OF THE
PLIMOTH CORRIDOR DO NOT EXTEND
EAST OF GREEN WHICH IS WHERE WE
HAD A FATAL CRASH IN MARCH AND
WHERE I ROUTINELY SEE PEOPLE
CROSSING WITHOUT A CROSSWALK.
SO I THINK THAT THAT'S LIKE ONE
THE ONE OF THE MORE CRITICAL
PLACES ON PLYMOUTH THAT NEEDS
TO BE ADDRESSED AND IT'S NOT IN
THE SCOPE.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO URGE US TO
EXPAND THE SCOPE TO A LITTLE
BIT FURTHER EAST ON PLYMOUTH.
>> THANK YOU.
ACTUALLY I CAN ADDRESS THAT FOR
YOU.
WE ARE THAT IS PART OF OUR ROAD
SAFETY AUDIT THAT WE ARE JUST
WRAPPING UP RIGHT NOW THAT
SECTION OF PLYMOUTH ROAD AND WE
ARE GETTING SOME FEEDBACK AND
RECOMMENDATIONS ON WHAT WE CAN
DO TO IMPROVE THAT.
>> SO WE SHOULD HAVE SOME MORE
INFORMATION FOR YOU AT THE NEXT
MEETING IN DECEMBER.
THAT'S FANTASTIC NEWS .
AND YOU SAID DECEMBER, POSSIBLY
DECEMBER.
WE'RE JUST NOW GETTING THE
FINAL REPORTS NOW WE STILL HAVE
TO LOOK AT THEM AND DIGEST THEM
THEN BUT WE CAN DEPENDING ON
AGENDA AND IF WE CAN OF WHAT WE
THE INFORMATION WE GET.
BUT WE SHOULD HAVE SOME GOOD
INFORMATION COMING OUT OF THAT
THAT WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO
IMPLEMENT.
>> WELL, THANK YOU FOR SHARING
AND LOOKING FORWARD TO SEEING.
YOU'RE WELCOME.
A FOLLOW UP ON OF QUESTIONS AND
YOU MAY OR MAY NOT BE AWARE
THAT WE HAVE A ROAD
RECONFIGURATIONS STUDY THE
THING KICKED OFF WITH A
CONTRACTOR BUT I GUESS WHAT IT
IS ABOUT THIS GRAND THAT ROAD
LANE RECONFIGURATIONS NOT JUST
NARROWING BUT WHERE
RECONFIGURATIONS COULD NOT BE A
PART OF THIS.
I MEAN I'M NOT TALKING ABOUT
BRINGING IN CURBS BUT LANES ARE
DEFINED BY PAIN.
SO IS THERE SOMETHING ABOUT
THIS THAT WOULD YOU DISALLOW
ANY KIND OF LANE
RECONFIGURATIONS?
>> IT WOULD PUT THE FUNDING IN
JEOPARDY.
>> YES, WE'VE BEEN TOLD FLAT
OUT NO ROAD IN FRONT PAGE
BELTWAY IS FLAT OUT THE ROAD.
>> WE ALSO DID NOT INCLUDE IT
IN OUR ORIGINAL GRANT AGREEMENT
.
SO REOPENING THAT WOULD GREATLY
OR POTENTIALLY GREATLY DELAY
FURTHER THIS PROJECT.
SO WE WERE LOOKING AT THINGS A
BIT MORE CONSERVATIVELY AND I'M
GLAD THAT WE TOOK THAT APPROACH
BECAUSE PROJECTS ARE BEING
CANCELED THAT ARE REDUCING LANE
AND CAPACITY.
IT'S NO THANK YOU OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS ON I'M
CURIOUS I NOTICED THAT STADIUM
BOULEVARD WAS ONE OF THE
SEGMENTS THAT WERE REMOVED FROM
THE GRID FROM TREATMENTS.
IS THERE ANYTHING WE CAN SAY
ABOUT THAT?
IS THAT BECAUSE IT'S PART
OF THE THE RODRIQUE FIGURATION
STUDY ALREADY OR IS THERE SOME
OTHER REASON THAT THAT WAS.
>> YEAH, THAT'S THAT IS
DEFINITELY A PART OF THAT AND
GIVEN THE TOOLS THAT WE HAD AT
OUR DISPOSAL, WE THOUGHT THERE
WOULD BE LESS VIABILITY AND
OPTIONS THAT WE COULD APPLY
ALONG THAT CORRIDOR AND SO WE
TRIED TO FOCUS ON THOSE AREAS
OF OPPORTUNITY AND THEN AGAIN
THAT STUDY WAS ALREADY UNDERWAY
TO TRULY EVALUATE WHAT NEEDED
TO BE APPLIED TO THAT CORRIDOR.
>> THE THAT ENABLED US TO PUT
THE NEAR MISS VIDEO ANALYTICS.
IS THAT COMING IN THE FUTURE?
>> THERE'S JUST NOT MUCH TO SAY
ABOUT IT AT THE MOMENT.
YEAH, I CAN PROVIDE A QUICK
UPDATE.
SO I DID ASK DEBBIE BEZZINA TO
DO A PRESENTATION TO THIS GROUP
IN JANUARY.
RIGHT NOW THE
SERVERS HAVE BEEN
DELIVERED INSTALLED.
THEY'RE BEING TESTED.
WE ARE GOING THROUGH OUR KIND
OF RISK REGISTER DEVELOPING OUR
SYSTEM ACCEPTANCE TEST.
WE ARE THE USER INTERFACE HAS
BEEN DEVELOPED AND WE'VE BEEN
PROVIDING COMMENT TO ENSURE
THAT PERSONAL IDENTIFIABLE
INFORMATION IS BLURRED OUT THAT
SOME OF THE CHANGES THAT ARE
PART OF THE RFP ARE BEING
ADDRESSED AND ALL OF THOSE ARE
MOVING FORWARD ON TIME AND ON
BUDGET.
SO I AM REALLY LOOKING FORWARD
TO HAVING DEBBIE PRESENT IN
JANUARY.
THERE WILL BE MUCH MORE TO
REPORT ON.
WE WILL BE DOING WE SHOULD BE
IN OUR THIRTY DAY BURN IN TO
ENSURE THAT EVERYTHING IS
OPERATIONAL AND DOING ALL
OF THE REVIEWS THAT ARE PART
OF THE RFP REQUEST.
AND SO YES, I'M VERY EXCITED TO
HAVE THAT PRESENTATION TO YOU
ON JANUARY.
OTHER COMMENTS QUESTIONS
ERIC,
THIS IS JUST A COMMENT THAT I
REALLY APPRECIATE THE HARD WORK
THAT YOU GUYS ARE DOING IN THIS
VERY UNCERTAIN TIME DEALING
WITH THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND
TRYING TO GET WHAT WE CAN AND I
REALLY APPRECIATE THE FINE LINE
THAT YOU ARE HAVING TO WALK ON
THIS AND TRYING TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE CAN GET SOMETHING THAT
BETTER AS OUR COMMUNITY.
SO REALLY, REALLY APPRECIATE
THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
WE'VE DONE A LOT OF WORDS
MISSING.
I DON'T DOUBT IT OR ANYONE ELSE
.
I WANT TO THANK THEM AND ERIC
AND MELISSA FOR BRINGING ALL
OF THIS THE VERY COMPREHENSIVE
UPDATE AND CERTAINLY LOOK
FORWARD TO THE JANUARY MEETING
AS WELL OR SOMETIME AROUND TO
TALK ABOUT THE NEAR MISS BIDDU
ANALYTICS.
SO ALL RIGHT.
AGENDA HERE.
NEXT UP COMMUNICATIONS SECTION
STAFF REPORT AND UPDATES SEVERE
I BELIEVE THIS WOULD PROBABLY
BE YOU GOT TRANSPORTATION
PROJECT UPDATES AND THEN THE
CRASH REVIEW TEAM REPORT ALSO
HAS SO EVERYONE WILL HAVE
RECEIVED THE TRANSPORTATION
UPDATES FOR OCTOBER .
WE ARE AT THAT POINT IN THE
CONSTRUCTION SEASON WHERE WE
ARE EVERYONE IS WORKING TO TRY
TO GET THINGS DONE AND UP PRIOR
TO THE END OF SEASONAL
RESTRICTIONS.
SO A COUPLE OF THINGS THAT I
WANT TO POINT OUT ABOUT OUR
ABOUT THE PLANS I'M GOING TO
READ THROUGH EVERYTHING SINCE
THEY ARE THERE AND READY FOR
YOU.
BUT A COUPLE OF UPDATES THAT
HAVE HAPPENED A LITTLE BIT MORE
NEAR TERM THAT ARE NOT GOING TO
BE IN THIS PARTICULAR UPDATE
ARE OUR FISCAL YEAR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS YOU WILL NOTE IN
THE UPDATE THAT BRIAN WROTE IN
HUBBARD THE CONSTRUCTION IS
ONGOING THAT ACTUALLY FINISHED
UP YESTERDAY.
SO WE HAVE THAT REPORT OUT FROM
MARK ACTUALLY TODAY'S
TRANSPORTATION TEAM MEETING.
>> SO I WANTED TO BE SURE TO
SHARE THAT SO ALL OF OUR WORK
IN THAT AREA FOR THIS PART
OF THE FISCAL YEAR HAS HAS BEEN
COMPLETED AND THE NEXT
CROSSWALK WHICH IS SOUTH DAKOTA
WILL BE OCCURRING IN SPRING AT
THIS POINT.
>> THE OTHER REALLY PIECE
OF NEWS THAT WE RECEIVED IS
THAT THE UTILITY RELOCATIONS
ARE FINALLY ALL DONE FOR
MILLER.
SO THINGS ARE CHUGGING AWAY ON
MILLER AND THAT MILLER PROJECT
REALLY.
AND DID ANYONE HAVE ANY
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE
TRANSPORTATION UPDATES ON
SCROLLING THROUGH IT?
I'M LOOKING TO SEE IS THE WORK
ON SOUTH INDUSTRIAL THAT THE
NORTHBOUND CLOSE SEEMED LIKE IT
WAS AN EMERGENCY PROJECT.
>> IS THAT TRUE AND IS THERE AN
UPDATE?
IT SEEMS EXTENSIVE LIKE THERE'S
A LOT OF UNDERGROUND WATER MAIN
OR SEWER WORK OR SOMETHING
GOING ON JUST WASN'T SURE WHAT
WAS GOING ON, HOW LONG THAT
WILL BE.
>> I DO NOT HAVE AN UPDATE ON
THAT PROJECT.
I'M NOT ONE OF THE ENGINEERS ON
THAT PROJECT BUT PAUL IS STILL
HERE.
>> SO THOMAS, ANYTHING ABOUT
THAT MAYBE YOU CAN JUMP IN AND
LET US KNOW.
I'M SORRY I CAN'T SPEAK ON THAT
ONE.
>> NEITHER CAN I.
YEAH.
JUST SEEMS SUCH A HUGE PROJECT
JUST KIND OF CAME OUT OF THE
BLUE LIKE OH WELL WHERE DID
THIS EVERYBODY KNOW THIS IS
COMING?
I DON'T THINK IT HAD BEEN
PLANNED.
I THINK IT WAS KIND
OF EMERGENCY THING SO OK GOOD
TO KNOW WE CAN GET YOU SOME
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION OR OTHER
QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS ON
PROJECT UPDATES
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THAT'S THE THEN SHUB TO THE
CRASH RESPONSE OR THE CRASH
REVIEW TEAM REPORT CYNTHIA NOW
I WILL SHARE MY SCREEN AND WE
CAN GO AHEAD AND TALK TO YOU
ABOUT THIS IS ALSO IN YOUR
PACKET.
SO WE HAVE OUR OUR CRASH REVIEW
TEAM REPORT FOR THIS MONTH.
>> WE HAD ONE CALL CRASH FROM
SEPTEMBER TO INVESTIGATE THIS
CRASH OCCURRED ON SEPTEMBER
TWENTY FIRST AND IT OCCURRED AT
TWELVE FIFTY ONE A.M. THERE WAS
ONLY ONE INDIVIDUAL INVOLVED IN
THIS CRASH AND THIS CRASH WAS A
FATALITY.
>> SO OUR ROADWAY CONDITIONS
WERE DRY ASPHALT DOWNHILL GRADE
APPROACHING A LEVEL AND THEN IT
LEVEL OUT OF IMPACT THAT
CONDITIONS WERE CLEAR AND DRY
AS FAR AS WEATHER CONDITIONS
AND CONDITIONS ARE DARK AND
LIGHTED.
THIS DID OCCUR ON JACKSON
AVENUE NEAR WARDEN AND THE
DESCRIPTION ONE OF THE
CONTRIBUTING FACTORS WAS SPEED.
SO OUR CRASH DESCRIPTION IS
THAT A MOTORCYCLIST WAS DRIVING
EASTBOUND ON JACKSON AVENUE AT
A HIGH RATE OF SPEED INDICATED
HERE.
VIDEO ANALYSIS INDICATES THEY
WERE TRAVELING AT EIGHTY FIVE
MILES PER HOUR APPROXIMATELY
WHEN THE MOTORCYCLE STRUCK A
DEER AT WARREN AVENUE.
THE MOTORCYCLIST WAS EJECTED
AND TRAVELED APPROXIMATELY
THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY FEET
FROM THE POINT IMPACT LOOKING
AT WHAT ARE MAJOR DANGEROUS
BEHAVIORS ARE WE TRACKED
THROUGH THE PLAN LEADING SPEED
WAS OUR ONLY DANGEROUS BEHAVIOR
TO NOTE THE OTHER THING TO NOTE
IS THAT IT WAS A MOTORCYCLIST
AND WE ARE NOTING THAT BECAUSE
MOTORCYCLISTS ARE
OVERREPRESENTED IN THIS DATA
SET AND JUST AS LOOKING AT THAT
ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE, APD
IDENTIFY HIGH SPEED ENFORCEMENT
AS THE CONCERN AND THEY ARE
CONTINUING TARGETED ENFORCEMENT
ON JACKSON AVENUE CORRIDOR AS
PART AS IS THE JACKSON SAFETY
CORRIDOR FROM OUR AS FAR AS
ENGINEERING GOES, THE CONCERNS
IDENTIFIED ARE THIS IS AN
IMPORTANT JURISDICTION ROADWAY
AND SPEED IS A CONCERN.
WE DID NOT CREATE A LIST
OF ENGINEERING RESPONSES AS
THIS IS NOT ONE OF OUR ROADWAYS
WE WILL BE DISCUSSING THIS KIND
OF THIS CRASH WITH AMTRAK AT
OUR NEXT QUARTERLY CHECK-IN AND
AS FAR AS EDUCATION GOES, OUR
CONCERNS IDENTIFIED ARE ARE
SPEEDING AND CONTINUING TO
EDUCATE ON SPEEDING AND ANIMAL
ANIMAL COLLISION CRASHES JUST
NOTING THAT THAT'S SOMETHING
THAT WE CAN WE CAN HAVE A
DISCUSSION WITH THE PUBLIC ON
ALL RIDES THAT ANYONE HAVE ANY
BIT OF .
WELL, THANKS FOR GOING OVER
THAT.
YOU BROUGHT UP MDT AND I GUESS
I'M JUST WONDERING HOW LONG
BEFORE WE CAN EXPECT TO HAVE
CONTROL OVER TRUNK LINES LIKE
JACKSON SO THAT WE CAN PUT IN
CORRECTIVE ACTIONS FOR CRASHES
LIKE THIS AND DOES PERHAPS A
FUTURE AGENDA TOPIC THE STATUS
OF THE TRUNK LINE TRANSFER?
WELL, I CAN SAY IT'S CERTAINLY
GOING TO COME BACK ON THE
AGENDA WHENEVER WHEN THERE'S AN
UPDATE.
I CAN'T SAY EXACTLY WHEN THAT
IS THAT MAYBE SOMEBODY ELSE
WILL BE BRINGING IT BACK AND
YOU HAVE TO REPEAT THE QUESTION
MAYBE SO I THINK HONESTLY HOW
DO I THAT IS PRETTY MUCH WHAT I
WAS GOING TO SAY AS WELL.
IT IS A PROCESS THAT IS WORKING
ON ITS OWN TIMELINE AND AS WE
ARE WORKING WITH A DIFFERENT
JURISDICTION, WE WE ARE WE HAVE
TO WORK WITH WITH THEIR STAFF
AND THEIR TIMELINES AND THEIR
RESOURCES AS WELL.
>> BUT WHEN THEY'RE WHEN THERE
IS AN UPDATE TO GIVE, WE WILL
DEFINITELY BRING IT BACK TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
ADD A LITTLE BIT MORE
INFORMATION.
>> THAT CONVERSATION HAS
STARTED AND YOU KNOW, JUST A
REMINDER THAT IT IS A
NEGOTIATION MEANING THAT I
THINK A LOT OF THE TIME IS
GOING TO BE TAKEN TALKING ABOUT
THE COST TO BRING THINGS UP TO
WHERE THEY SHOULD BE IN GOOD
REPAIR BECAUSE WE WOULD BE
LEAVING MONEY ON THE TABLE
ESSENTIALLY SO AND SOME
OF THOSE ARE IN QUITE POOR
REPAIR.
SO THAT'S NOT A YOU KNOW,
THAT'S NOT A QUICK THIS WAS
NEVER GOING TO BE A QUICK
PROCESS.
I THINK WE KNEW THAT AND WE
STARTED IT SO YEAH.
SORRY I DON'T HAVE THAT WE
DON'T HAVE MORE OF AN UPDATE
BUT THAT'S WHAT I KNOW SO FAR.
YEAH.
WHAT I WOULD LIKE TO ADD TO
THAT TO THIS CONVERSATION NOW
IS THAT SUZANNE HAS DONE
EXCELLENT WORK GETTING OUR TEAM
AND ITS LOCAL AND REGIONAL TEAM
TO SIT DOWN TOGETHER AND BE
DISCUSSING THESE CONCERNS AND
THESE CRASHES AND A QUARTERLY
BASIS AND WE ARE HAVING GREAT
CONVERSATION AND AND THROUGH
THE CONVERSATIONS THAT WE'RE
HAVING, IT'S VERY CLEAR THAT
SOME POLICIES AND THE WAY
POLICIES ARE BEING APPLIED AT
THE LOCAL AND REGIONAL LEVELS
OF OUR CHANGING AND THAT SOME
POLICIES THAT THEY'VE HAD THEY
HAVE HAD FOR A LONG TIME ARE
THEY HAVE MORE WEIGHT AS FAR AS
THE WAY THAT THE AGENCY IS
RESPONDING TO REQUESTS AND
CONCERNS.
>> SO I THINK THERE'S IT'S A
VERY LARGE AGENCY DOES IT'S NOT
NIMBLE.
IT DOES NOT PIVOT QUICKLY BUT
IT IS PIVOTING
REALLY
INTERESTING TO YOUR OTHER
COMMENTS QUESTIONS I DID WANT
TO ADD ONE KIND OF A FUN THING
THAT THE TRANSPORTATION TEAM'S
BEEN INVITED BY NACCHO TO
PARTICIPATE AS PART OF A COHA
OF TEN CITIES AND JURISDICTIONS
IN THE GREAT LAKES REGION TO BE
PART OF A SERIES OF VIRTUAL
WORKSHOPS AS WELL AS
PARTICIPATE AT THEIR CONFERENCE
NEXT SPRING.
SO FEBRUARY THROUGH MAY OF NEXT
YEAR TO TALK ABOUT THEIR
BICYCLE DESIGN GUIDELINES AND
SOME OTHER TOPICS RELATED TO
ALL THE WORK WE DO AND SO WE'RE
REALLY EXCITED AND THE ENTIRE
TEAM IS PARTICIPATING AT THE
INVITATION OF NAFO AND THEY'RE
PAYING FOR ONE FOR CYNTHIA
ACTUALLY TO ATTEND SO THEY GOT
SOME GRANTS AND THIS IS WHAT
THEY'RE DOING WITH SO WE'RE
KIND OF EXCITED ABOUT THE FACT
THAT WE WERE INCLUDED.
>> IT'S BETTER TO CONGRATULATE
.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THERE'S NOTHING ELSE WE MOVE ON
TO OUR REPORTS SO ANY
COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE AS A
LIAISON DO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE A REPORT OR UPDATE NOW
OR NOT SEEING ANY THE
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS, ANY OTHER
REPORTS OR UPDATES FROM ANY
OTHER COMMISSIONER?
THERE IS YOUR MEETING NEXT
MONTH AGENDA ITEMS I'M NOT SURE
IF TO PUT YOU ON THE SPOT,
ARIANNA.
IF YOU HAVE AN IDEA OF I KNOW
YOU MAINTAIN A SPREADSHEET
ABOUT SOME AGENDA ITEMS WE CAN
LOOK FORWARD TO IN THE NEAR
FUTURE WHILE YOU'RE DOING THAT,
OBVIOUSLY A CALL OR ANY OTHER
AGENDA ITEMS YOU CAN ALWAYS
EMAIL US OR CONTACT WHATEVER
WAY WORKS IF YOU HAVE IDEAS FOR
AGENDA TOPICS I CAN SPEAK TO
ONE OF THE ITEMS ON THE AGENDA
NEXT MONTH WILL BE MADISON
TRANSIT CENTER.
UM, WE'LL BE GIVING A
PRESENTATION TO GIVE US AN
UPDATE TO GIVE YOU AN UPDATE ON
WE WORKSHOP WITH THEM TWICE
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF MONTHS
TO TALK THROUGH THE MADISON
TRANSIT CENTER DESIGN AND WHAT
THAT CAN LOOK LIKE AND HOW IT'S
GOING TO OPERATE.
SO THEY'RE GOING TO BRING THAT
FORWARD TO SHARE THAT
INFORMATION NEXT MONTH.
DERMO, I'M SORRY IF I MISSED
THIS BECAUSE I DID HEAR CYNTHIA
TALK ABOUT CRASH DATA BUT I
DIDN'T I MISSED SOME OF IT SO I
WAS WONDERING IF WE'RE GOING TO
BE TALKING ABOUT NOW THAT THE
CRASHES ARE UP TO DATE FOR
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR I SAW THAT
THEY'RE UPLOADED INTO THE
SYSTEM AND TO TALK ABOUT LIKE
HOW WE MIGHT HAVE WE KIND
OF HAVE A COMBINATION
OF INFORMATION SO WE HAVE THIS
BATCH INFORMATION THAT WE GET
ONCE I THINK THE STATE
CERTIFIES ALL OF THE DATA AND
THEN WE UPLOAD IT AND AS WE
KNOW THAT'S QUITE BEHIND AND
THEN WE'VE GOT MONTHLY CITY
ADMINISTRATOR REPORTS AND THEN
THE CRASH REVIEWS IN THIS WHICH
ARE VERY WELCOME AND HELPFUL.
>> BUT WHAT WE DON'T REALLY
HAVE IS A AT LEAST ON THE CITY
COUNCIL SIDE AND THE PUBLIC
SIDE IS A GOOD WINDOW INTO WHAT
THE CUMULATIVE IS OVER THE LAST
YEAR EVEN IF IT'S TENTATIVE AND
WE KNOW THAT LIKE ONCE IT'S
CERTIFIED CAN CHANGE.
SO ANYWAY THAT'S TO SAY IS LIKE
COULD WE HAVE A FUTURE TABAC
YES I KNOW ACTUALLY EMAILED US
ABOUT THIS RECENTLY ABOUT AN
INJURY FATALITY DASHBOARD.
HE CITED AN EXAMPLE FROM
BOULDER.
>> SO YEAH, THAT'S CERTAINLY
SOMETHING WE CAN THAT IS AN
AGENDA TOPIC I BELIEVE CYNTHIA
IS PLANNING ON DOING AN ANNUAL
REPORT NEXT MEETING AND WE DO
HAVE A WEBSITE OF ALL OUR CRASH
DATA WE CAN SHARE THAT LINK.
>> IT'S ON THE CITY'S WEBSITE.
YEAH, WE HAVE BUT IT DOESN'T
LIKE FOR EXAMPLE WE'RE JUST
GETTING TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
DATA.
WE DON'T HAVE A PLACE WHERE THE
CURRENT YEAR WE KIND OF HAVE UP
TO DATE EVEN THOUGH THAT DATA
IS INCLUDED WE HAVE IT YOU KNOW
I JUST DON'T THINK WE'RE
COLLECTING IT MAKING IT
ACCESSIBLE.
>> OK, WELL WE ARE COLLECTING
IT AS YOU HEAR THE REPORTS
EVERY MONTH THAT WE CAN
CERTAINLY LOOK INTO HOW WE'RE
PRESENTING IT SOMETHING TO
CERTAINLY DISCUSS NEXT MONTH
DURING THAT TYPE OF RIGHT OR
DID YOU HAVE A OR ANYTHING
OTHER THAN THE THE MEDICINE THE
CENTER THAT'S ON TAP FOR NEXT
MONTH?
YEAH.
SO I JUST WENT AHEAD AND I
PULLED UP OUR LIST OF UPCOMING
AGENDA ITEMS FOR THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS OR SO.
I KNOW THAT WE WERE HOPING TO
HAVE A CALM ECOATM DISCUSSING
DESIGN SO WE'RE HOPING THAT
WILL BE A AN AGENDA ITEM FOR
NOVEMBER.
WE DO HAVE A BUSINESS ITEM
RELATED TO PARKING REMOVAL THAT
MAY OR MAY NOT BE ON THE
AGENDA.
>> SO WE'RE STILL WAITING.
YEAH, AND THEN THERE IS IN THE
YEAR AND THEN WE ALSO HAVE A
ROAD RESURFACING PROJECT THAT
MIGHT BE ON THE AGENDA AS WELL.
SO WE'RE STILL WAITING ON SOME
MORE INFORMATION BOTH OF THOSE
.
BUT AS ALWAYS SO THOSE OTHER
IDEAS FOR AGENDA TOPICS.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THE NEXT MEETING THEN WILL
BE HELD NOVEMBER 19TH,
WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 19TH TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND THAT WILL ALSO
BE A VIRTUAL MEETING.
AND SO IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS, WE WILL ADJOURN
THIS OCTOBER FIFTEEN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE MEETING SAYING NO
OBJECTIONS IS THE MEETING IS
ADJOURNED.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU